YOu are of late, Gallants, grown so severe,
Plays on the Post are damned, before you hear:
Why should you be such strangers to remorse,
To Judge, before you try? The fairest Course,
Could we for once advise, would be to stay
And hear the Cause, before you giv't away.
But since it is so, we scorn to court a smile:
Be cruel as you can, scoff, and revile
Till you have spent your Spleens; that so you may
Want them for to condemn a better Play.
This may deserve the worst that you can say;
Would the Judicious only Critics be,
They Would do it, where there is just cause, and moderately.
But there is an up-start Crew, a Generation
Of little Fopps, Critics by imitation:
Young Men in Flaxen Wiggs, just sent to Town,
For to be cheated, and to wear a Gown.
These are the little things, perch't in the Pit,
Making of noises, which some Fools think wit:
Cry down what is now, or what e're was writ.
Be just for once, and grant me this demand;
Let me be doomed by those that understand:
Death Glorious looks, brought by a Noble hand.

THanks to ill Fortune; I have lived long enough, and spent money enough, to
make me poor in pocket, and rich in Experience; in which expense, both of time
and money, I Have learned there is nothing so great a fault, or less a Man's
Friend, that desires to live in a full Fortune, than Honesty. My losses at Dice
have sufficiently qualified me for an expert cheat in that confounded Calling.
My Conversation with those kind things, called Women, has very well enabled me
to perform the gentile profession of pimping, now, of all Vices, most in
fashion; and that blushing Fool Modesty's so much my Enemy, that I want the
confidence to wheedle a poor Tailor to take my rags off, and new rigg me.
Whilst I had money, never came a Night, but I was Ushered home by half a dozen
of the Sons of this sinful Town, to lay me safe in my Lodging, but those went
with my Money. Yet, Sot that I am, pestered with an old fashioned Principle of
Honesty, I must needs hate to do as I have been done by, though the Devil
offers me an excellent opportunity in Young Leftwell, a Fellow newly come to a
large Estate, got by his damned Father, by the fall of many a fair Family; who
has scarce wit enough to be made the sore-man of a Watch. Now, whether it be
not Religion to work upon this Animal; faith I think --

Why, how now, Ned, pining in poverty?


Or contriving a way to create new Clothes?


Or, art waiting here with a watery stomach, in expectation of an Apparition of
Pork and Turnips? 'Sdeath, Ned, this is the worst way of diet the Devil could
direct thee


You're merry, Gentlemen; you're merry. Sure, the Devil you spoke of, Friendly,
has made you so; has he not got up into your Garret at St. Giles's, and bought
your soul for a small morsel of Money? Why, the Spanish threepence I left with
you could never produce this spirit. You're grown witty, and wanton; what, are
you well lyned in the pocket? Come, let us see; pish, never retreat; what a
Rascal are you, to rally thus


If your design be to search his pockets, prithee desist; for, to my knowledge,
they fell out of his Breeches a Month ago; and he could have spared nothing
better, for he has had no employment for them this twelve month


Pox of your Trumpeters face; must you undertake to talk with your plump
countenance? I am a Rogue, if I have not seen a Butter-eating Dutchman, that
has been drowned nine days, appear like a trim Courtier, in comparison of
thee. Thou art a Fellow that would give thy Ears (for Money thou have none)
to kiss the hand of a Kitchen Wench, in hopes to find fat enough upon her
fingers, to allay the fury of thy Stomach


Leave laboring your little wits, and draw near, for I intend you two to be of
my Council


Ned, Ned, we have always found your Counsel to be nothing but persuasions to
poverty, what a blessed thing it is to live Honest, and be lousy; that it is
better to be lazy, and lack every thing, than work in the ways of wickedness
for wealth


The Rogue by chance has clapped upon a truth. It Is even so, Ned. We have fed so
long upon your Divinity Lectures, that we have almost forgot to eat in earnest,
and have hardly Linen enough left to harbor a Lowse. Therefore we will have no
more on it, dear Monsieur Melancholy; for my part, I Am resolved to turn Hector,
quarrel in the streets with Drunkards, and so steal Hats and Perukes; and begin
to believe it a very pious way of living; Ay, and it is very taking


And I Am resolved to follow thee; either fight, filch, padd, or pimp; and no
longer suffer under the horrid persecutions of Poverty


So, fate you well, Sir; fare you well.


If I thought you were such wretched Rascals as you are painfully making
appear, you should even pine in your poverty, e're participate in my pious, and
I hope, profitable design; but I know ye better. You hear, Gentlemen, that
Young Leftwell is come of Age, though not to Years of discretion. Do you
believe it a sin to bubble this abominable Brute out of a part of that ill got,
and like to be worse spent, Estate


Faith, Ned, I think none at all; but how to do it, will require some time to
consider on it: I could make shift to do it with the Dye, but the Rogue has been
so cautious of that from his Cradle, that he swounds at the sight of them


Then Drinking will do nothing; for a pint of Ale puts a Padlock upon his
Pocket; and you may as well persuade a Presbyterian Parson to Charity, as him
out of a penny; there is no way, but to unlock his leachery by the sight of a
fine soft Wench


O hang him, he was once in Love with his Uncle's Kitchin-Maid, and, (as he
calls it) was crossed in his affection; and ever since, the Fool faints at the
sight of a Female


But good Clothes must first be thought on; for you know we three are at
present (as a man may say) in a very threadbare condition; which this
Clod-pole hates worse than an Old Alderman does Hunting. It Is certain we shall
never be received in this garb. Ned, cannot you get the old confiding man,
sweet Mr. Sowell, to new suit us, in order to this design, with a large promise
of sudden satisfaction


See where the Ass comes, sadled in silk. Let Us all put on sobriety, and
salute him


Moses, can you tie a shoe in the newest fashion?


Sir, I tied your Fathers a fore you were born, and (peace be with him) he
never disliked it


Come to, then, but have a care of my Corns, good Meses. How now, Ned, no new
Clothes yet; I would you were finer, that you might be fitter for my Company


I am sorry, Sir, that my ill garb commands me from your good Company.


Prithee Ned, what are these Tatter-demallions that attend thee? they look like
men of the forlorn hope, with half their Clothes taken off by small shot.
'Slife, there is one has a hole shot through his Hat


Friends of mine, Sir; that you would honor in acknowledging.


Sir, your most humble Servant; I should be proud to be better acquainted.


Sir, I don't know you, nor desire to be better acquainted with you, till you
get better Clothes on your back. There Is you, and your Friend, would serve for
a couple of Scare-crows, if you could get Credit for carriage into the
Country. I Will plague that Fellow, when I was poor, he persecuted me


Td's Death, Lovewell, I shall be constrained to kick him; I cannot hold.


O, by all means do, and starve for it.


Ned Lovewell, how long have you known these Raggamuffins?


Why, an't please you, Sir, about a dozen years.


Always in the same Clothes, I warrant; for less time sold never have taken
'em into so many pieces. Do you ever lie with them? Are their Shirts any better
than their Suits


You're too great a Tyrant. They are, I assure you, Sir, Gentlemen of a very
ancient Family


If their Family be as old as their Clothes, it is Ancient indeed. God by'e,
Gentlemen; if ever I see you again, I shall certainly dream of a Dunghill.
Come along, Moses


What a damned Rogue is this? he has abused us beyond bearing.


Let him talk on; I find now what will do it. I Will strait to serious Sowell,
and solicit him to help us: Meet me about seven a Clock at the Old House


Heavens bless thee with the spirit of effectual persuasion.


Cousin Fickle, thou have some of the strangest humors in thee, that ever Maid
was mad withal. Thou never like a dress above half an hour, nor a man more
than half a day: Thou art a mere Proteus, and put'st thy self into as many
shapes. Thou have been this one day in six several dresses; and the last week
loved, and hated, seven several Men. No body that knows thee believes thee any
thing else but distracted. We shall have thee, e're long, fall out with Life,
and dye for diversion


And thou art (Dear Coz.) as mad the other way; thou had rather wear thy
Clothes till they are moldy, then give thy Maid the trouble of a new tyring.
That garb and Gown you now go in, is as well known as the Church, and I believe
you think it as durable; for Betty says you never intend to change it


O fie; Madam, never trust me, if ever I talked of your Ladyship at this
unmannerly rate


Let her run on, Wench; I Am certain she will be out of love with this way of
talking quickly: I Have a mind to see if she can continue a quarter of an hour in
any one thing


Then, Cousin, thou art mad of one Man. Thou have loved a Fellow in foul Linen
(I think he is a Gentleman) but what then? thou have loved him almost half a
year, which is a horrible thing to think on. But I am weary of the Garden; I Will
go talk of Stateaffairs to my old Uncle. Good b'ye, Coz


Go thy ways, Mad-cap: I Will undertake, before my Father can turn about and
talk two words, she will be weary of the first, and go to find new Company


I vow, Madam, she wearies me out of my little wits, to pin, and unpin Curles;
to add, and diminish color; to new place the Pendants: any, sometimes at Noon
day, to put on Coyfes and Pinners. I would to Heaven she were well married,
that I might not be pestered. But now I talk of Marriage, pray, Madam, when did
you hear from Mr. Lovewell


Not a great while; Betty, I Am afraid I must wear the Willow, I doubt he has
left me; what think thou


O, Madam, I dare swear, he had rather lose his Eyes. If that Man be not truly
a Gentleman, there is no Gentility in being. It Is a thousand pities he is poor:
In spite of his low garb he will look like himself; I Will tell you, Madam, when
I have light him down stairs, and I dare swear he has not had three shillings
in his pocket, he has put half a Crown into my hand, when I was grieved to take
it. 'Twere sin, to doubt his Love


Betty, I doubt you will prove my Rival; could you find in your heart to love
him, if I should leave him


If I could not, I wish I might dye a Maid; which would be much against my
will, Madam


Hark, does not some body knock at the Garden Gate? Go see who it is.


I go, Madam; I vow, I hope from my heart it is he.


I love him well; yet, if I marry him, I Am lost; and left to languish in a life
of loathed poverty, for he is poor. And it is because he has a generous soul, he
is so. My Father cannot hear of him with patience; for he had rather wed me to
a Brute, with Money, than to the best of Men, that wants it. That Age should so
defective be in Reason; as to prefer this sordid Dunghill Earth before the
best of Gallantry and worth

But here he comes, and Betty gone; this Baggage never fails to leave him to
all opportunities; but I Will act a Woman's part, for once; I Will appear strange,
to try him


My dear Leticia!


Soft; Sir, you have been away so long, you have forgot your duty. I pityed you
whilst you knew Civility, and for that reason indulged you; and thought to have
persuaded my Maid to Marry you, and got my Father to put you into a Farm, in
hopes you would in a little time become a perfect Plough-man. Your
mis-behaviour now makes me believe now you have been one. And so good b'ye, Sir


Dear Madam, let me conjure you. --


Hold, Sir, no conjurations; if you have any thing to say, speak soberly, and
at distance: I find, allowing you too near address, begets you confidence


Will not this posture serve, as well as any?


I, truly, I think that best becomes you; now go on, Sir.


Then I proceed, and beg a knowledge of my Crimes; and why I find those killing
frowns; a Cloud on that fair face, which was always wont to wear such smiles
as sweetened all my sorrows, and made me triumph in despite of tears. Have I
done ill? tell me, that I may dye: 'Twere Villainy, to live after a Crime
committed against you


How Is this? Certainly, that Fellow believes my Daughter to be the Goddess
Ceres, and he is begging bread. In Faith, I shall put you besides your Petition.
De'you hear, Sir; there is nothing for you, I can assure you


We Are both undone -- My Father -- what will you do?


Friend, what is your business here? A man would guess by your Clothes you
should have more kindness for your stockings, than to beg on your knees. It Is
ten to one, whether she had given you enough to have mended what you wore out
in your worship. But hark you, Sir; I believe, by your face, you come to
solicit her Love. Pray pack off, Sir, or I Will make my Cane walk about your
Coxcomb


Pray, Sir, will you --


Pray, Sir. Pray me no prays; but be gone, or I shall remove you at a very
unmannerly rate: Will you stir, Sir


Let me entreat --


I Will spoil your entreaties, with a pox to you. Put this Fellow out of doors,
and see him pumpt


Good Sir, have a little pity of the poor Gentleman; being hard pursued by
Bailiffs, he, to avoid them, got over the Garden Wall; and fearful he had
frighted me, when you came in, was earnestly asking pardon. Now, Sir, you know
the full of his offense, I hope you will retract your Sentence


I thought 'twas some such Run-away-Rascal; no, he shall not be pumpt, but turn
him out to the liberty of the Law; let him pay, or to Prison, a Gods name; turn
him out of doors there

Come, Daughter, I hope in a short time to have a Husband for you; in the mean
while I shall keep you from such Cattle as this; for I begin to find this is
but an excuse, to hide this beggarly Fellow's kindness. Let me ever see you
with him again, and you shall ee'ne to him for altogether, with as many tatters
as he has; for I am resolved to dis-own you


Sir, you know my affections hitherto have waited on your will, and shall do
still


I wish they may; come in with me.


Good Morrow, Gentlemen; I suppose you think I can feed upon Faggot sticks, or
pay my Rent with Cheese parings; why, what do you mean, Gentlemen? What do you
mean? Must I never have my Money? here is now seven shillings, for seven weeks
lodging, and as much for diet, and washing the little linen you have, God
knows; this is money in a poor Woman's pocket, Gentlemen


Dear Land-lady, be mollified; let not your passion put you besides your Reason.


Talk not to me of Reason, wretch, as thou art; give me my Money, I Will make
more than one know on it, else. Then there is that blundering Sot, your
Companion, that stands sneering, and says nothing, could come and borrow Money
of my Maid; I Will call her, to witness it


Well, what then, Beldame?


Well, it is very well; if Young Wenches must work to lend you their wages.


You, Dame damnable, hold your bawling tongue, in the Devils name, and cease
dunning, or I Will draw it out of your Mouth as long as my Arm


Prithee hold thy idle prating; you must give better words, fore George we
shall get no Dinner else to day. Come, Land-lady, let me persuade you into
peace; a little time will enable us to pay you all: I have a Bill of Exchange
to receive a hundred pounds within six weeks, and it shall all wait upon thy
Command, dear Landlady


Gentlemen, you know, Gentlemen, I am as unwilling to speak, as the Child
unborn; but when I am forced to it, you must not take it ill. I want four
shillings of my Quarters Rent for my House, to make it up five and twenty; if
you could but furnish me with that, it would do me a mighty kindness


Pox of your old, ugly, abominable -- no more dunning.


O you Rogue, I will ask for my own, when you are hanged. Sirrah, have NOT I been
fain to lend you my own Shift to wear, whilst yours was washed, to keep you from
being lousy? Don't you now weat my poor dead Husband's? I cannot speak of him,
without tears


Poor Land-lady, lament no more; it is true, Will was an honest fellow, and one
that lived in the fear, as a Man may say, and would drink off his quart, or
two, of Ale, as quietly as a Quaker, upon another Man's cost


I, Mr. Friendly, you knew him. Don't you remember, when I sold Fruit first,
how he beat Christopher Crab, the Coster-monger, for calling of me Grundy; he
would not let a Lamb wrong me: he used always to call me his Monkey


Ay, marry did he. But, Land-lady, I hear you have a Flitch of Bacon sent you
from Will's Friends


That I have indeed, Mr. Friendly; and it is as good as ever was cut with Knife:
And if you will please to come home at dinner time, and eat a piece, with an
Egg, you shall be very welcome. It may be done homely, but I Will warrant you
cleanly


By this light, Land-lady, I don't know a better Cook then thou art, in all
Christendom; and here is honest Tom has said so a thousand times


It Is more your goodness, than my desert, to say so, Sir. I hope, Mr.
Faithful, you will take no notice of what I have said


No notice in the World, Woman; get Dinner ready, we will come in time.


My Servant, I Am afraid, is something solitary, where e're he is; he cannot
choose but wonder what is his, fault; my Fathers coming in disturbed both him and
me: but here I have a Letter ready writ shall satisfy how well I love him; and
that my last anger only was to try him. How sad a thing is Love, when it
wants liberty? The Man I love is one that does deserve as much as Man may do;
but yet my Father says, he that wants Money, consequently wants Merit. What
shall I do in this extremity? Love answers thus; In having him, I live; in
missing him, I dye; I must do Cupid Justice. -- Betty


Madam.


I Have work for you to do; and such as you will take kindly: can you find in your
heart to carry this Letter to Mr. Lovewell


Faith, Madam, not contentedly, if I thought it were not kind. Pray, Madam,
Commiserate the poor Gentleman: you have enough for your self, and him, and
twenty to attend you


I, but my Father loves him not so well as thou do. He Will not hear of him
that has nothing answerable to my full fortune


May your Father go into another World then, and let him live no longer, to
hinder the happiness of two such real Lovers


Away, you Baggage, carry your Letter, and take this purse; desire him to pay
it where I ordered him; then bring me word, how he takes the Intelligence


I am gone, Madam.


Thou active god of Love, prescribe a way To make me happy in a Marriage day.


Prithee stand farther off, thy breath stinks of Red-Herrings, enough to stifle
a man. I Am ready to run mad; never was man so miserable


Why, what is the matter, man? Art clapped by some kind Companion? or does thy
Conscience accuse thee of living too long honest


Or, has Sewell given a sad denial; so that there is no hopes of new Habit?


Gentlemen, though nothing you guess at is the cause of my disconte^^; yet I
can tell you that will trouble you; there is little hopes of your being tired in
new Trappings: you may live still in your leather Linings, and increase in
Cattle. Sewell proves inexorable, as to you, though kind to me. Gentlemen, mine
are making; it is very true, Gentlemen, I wish the case were your own; yet I
have something still sticks worse upon my stomach. Prithee stand further off,
thou wilt stifle me with thy breath


Out upon you, for a fretful fopp; you have been trading with some
three-half-penny Wench, that is sweetened with a pennyworth of Pomatum, and now
your Nose allows nothing else


Prithee, Friendly, will thou tell me one thing?


Faith, I will.


But will you seriously?


By this light, I will.


Did you drink to day after your Dinner?


The Devil's in this Satirical Fellow; he pretends to be always melancholy,
and then he is most maliciously abusive


Ha, ha, ha.


Our business is like to be well carried on between a couple of conceited
Coxcombe. If you can live with laughting at one another, I would have you do
nothing else; if otherwise, why don't we come to the business? Have thou
persuaded the Tailor to provide us Tackle


Come, Gentlemen, I Will put you out of your pain. What de'e think he says?


De'e call this putting people out of their pain, to set their brains upon the
Rack to read your dealings with a damned Tailor, that no body knows where to
find besides your self. Prithee, be serious but one minute, and let us be
satisfi'


Why then I Will tell you. After I had taken a great deal of pains to find him,
and inquired at every House where they sold a sealed quart for two pence


Well, what then?


Why, then I mist him. And I assure you, never saw him since I saw you.


Faith, you have taken a great deal of pains, and made a mighty bustle, to
bring forth nothing


I Will be hanged if he has not been drunk ever since in a Chimney corner, with
some Weavers Wife, without More-Gate; and at last been beaten out by her
Husband, and that makes him melancholy


Your Servant, Mr. Lovewell; will you give me leave to speak one word in
private with you


Pretty Mrs. Betty; I Will wait on you instantly. Pray, dear Friends, leave me
now. At Night I Will meet you, and give you (I hope) a good account of all our
concerns


Ned, Ned, this will not do; this is a little unkind: you have had a share in a
Mistress of mine, e're now. What need you make these pretenses to put us off?
We know your meaning, never mince the matter, man; she is a very pretty Wench;
I would I were with her where thou have been


I faith, Franck, she is very civil. Let me desire you to lay aside all thoughts
to the contrary, and you shall command me any thing. Prithee leave me a little


Don't believe him, Franck; he will feign a hundred things to fobb us off: but if
I stir without a share in this prize, I Will be pegg'd to a post for boys to
throw rotten Pears at. Remember, Ned, you would not leave me one Morning, when
my Landress came to my Chamber


Sir, I see you're engaged. I Am sorry I came at this unlucky time to trouble
you


Dear Mrs. Betty, I beg your pardon; I am but giving these two Bailiffs
directions about a business that concerns me* I shall have done in a minute


I have no more heart to go, than a Man has to play at Dice the day before he is
to be hanged


Let me conjure you by all our Friendship, not to offer me this most unmannerly
affront. You don't know what injury you do me. Dear Friends desist, she is one
that waits upon a person of Quality, and a near relation of mine, and not of
that strain you take her; faith, she e'ant


What a pox, never tell us this. I have known you my self these dozen years, and
never see any thing with you look like an honest Woman; nor will believe this
so, though thou swear it by the soul of thy dead Father. What an idle thing is
this in you, to persuade people to things so improbable, that know the World as
well as you do; To go tell us that a Wench, in this garb, would be sent to a
Gentleman's Chamber at this time o'th day, if there want a design to do -- Fie,
fie


What harm will it do you, Ned, to let us have a little liberty with this
pretty piece of Woman's flesh? She Will be as fit for you again to morrow, as
e're she was. You know we are both sound


Your Servant, Sir; I Will call some other time.


Mrs. Betty, I Have but a little more to say now, and they will be fully informed
in my affairs. Gentlemen, either leave me, or resolve to fight me; for I would
not endure to be thus affronted by my Father. Have you forgot all Friendship


No, hang ye, I love you a little too well yet, to fight with you for a Whore;
and so good buy to ye


It Is very fine, that we have lived thus long, and must now be Hectored out of
a Wench: I shall be quit with you, Sir


Gentlemen, your Servant; pray be careful in the business.


We shall take care to requite you.


Was ever man thus pestered by a couple of Puppys* Betty, I Am sorry I have been
constrained by the tyranny of business, to make you stay thus long


If it were much longer, Sir, I should not have believed it a trouble, since
it is to serve you. For I think I have a Letter here comes laden with Love: if I
thought it had not, some body else should have been the Messenger for me; for I
hate to be concerned in any thing that may diminish the content of a Gentleman.
This is the Letter; and this Money my Lady desires you to pay where she has
appointed


Mrs. Betty, I acknowledge my self much bound to you.


SIR, I Am sorry my Father fell so unhappily upon us, that hindered my
Conclusion, which I intended as kind as I began cruel; but however I appeared
then, I am now as you have always found me, that unhappy, but affectionately,
Yours,

L. P. As you love me, receive what I have sent you.

Most blessed tidings. Mrs. Betty, pray be pleased to pay my humble service to
your Lady; and let her know, I cheerfully obey her Commands

I hope, Sir, she has laid no more upon you then you are able to bear. Your
obedient Servant, Sir


Your humble Servant, Mrs. Betty.


How now, Runwell; how do thou hold out? can thou not find in thy heart to
eat

Sir, I believe I should not run away from a piece of a Roasted Horse: but let
hunger be hanged, I defy it; feed, or fast, I Will never leave you, while I
live, Sir


Here Is Money for you; when you have dyn'd, step to Sewell, the Tailor; bid him
come to me


By this hand, Sir, if he refuse to come, I Will bring him on my back.


Now will I set Sewell to work for me and my ill-clad Companions, who I am sure
have gratitude enough to take it kindly. Then, my young Squire, I Will try what
may be done
Where no game's played, there is nothing can be won.



BY my troth, Girls, you spoil your selves with lying so long a bed; it makes
you look like a great-belly'd Woman that has lost her longing. Betty, I think I
must give you a Commission to bang 'em up


I Vow, Sir, I think you must get some body else to beat me up too then; for
the Young Ladies have spoyl't me, and made me ready to lie as long as they


Uncle, your Man has the worst way of dressing you in the World; Sir, he
always puts your Ruff on one way. It Is an errant shame to see a Man so long in
one fashion, as you have been


What, art thou mad, Coz? There is but one way of putting on a Ruff, unless you
would have me wear the forepart behind


Look here, Sir, is your Ruff tied as my Whisk is? Pray, Sir, let me tie it. I
protest I Will lay twenty shillings I tie it better than Old Ralph has done


I like it very well, good Cousin, if thou could like it to let it alone; no
body has found fault with it this twenty years, besides thee. But I know thou will never let me alone till thou have done it; therefore, prithee dispatch me
quickly


Did he receive it with such joy?


Joy! He could have said or done no more, had I come for to secure him of
eternal happiness hereafter


I Will be judged by all the World now, if it be'nt handsomer by a hundred times;
it looks like any Cravat. I vow, Uncle, if my Aunt were alive again, she would
a new fall in love with you


Why, what have thou done, Cousin; tied up my Ruff like a shatter'd-brain'd Boy
with a Tassel at my Chin? Prithee give me my Point again. A pox of your
Cravats, you shall never dress me more, I Will assure you; here, Leticia, take it
you, and tie my Ruff, and let her have her Ribbon


Well, say what you will; I Am certain the Ribbon becomes you better than the
Point. Betty, how thy Hood sits to day! I dare be whipped if thou did not dress
thee without the Glass; and this Whish sits all awry: step up to my Cabinet,
I Will lend you one of my laced ones


I thank you, Madam; I had as liff wear this to day.


Well, do then. Uncle, pray when comes my Cousin Lett's Servant? I long to see
him


You Will be dressing of him as soon as e're he comes within the doors, I dare
swear. But to satisfy you, the man that loves her, and whom she must love (if
she loves me) I expect to be here this Morning


Pray, Sir, is he Young, or Old?


Why, Young, very Young; newly come of Age.


Is he a handsome man, Sir?


Very handsome, I protest, Cousin.


Has he money enough?


I, my good Girl; he has more money than twenty of the Whip-Jacks of this
Town, who walk about with a half-starv'd footboy, that has fasted three days,
and never eats, but when his Master treats a Wench


Indeed, Sir.


I, indeed, Cousin.


She Will weary my Father out of his wits.


Is he good-natured, Sir?


I, truly; I believe the Man to be of a good principle, and will be kind to a
Wife


Did he ever learn to Dance, Uncle?


I Will answer thee no longer; thou begin'st to be very impettinent, Coz.


Will you walk in the Gallery then, Sir?


Any where, so thou will promise me not to weary me with thy eternal rattle.


Come, Gallants, move with Majesty. And show your selves to the most advantage
that may be. Faithful, you are always looking upon your shooe-strings, like a
Prentice upon an Easter Holy Day. Hold up your Head, and look handsomely; take
your Gloves out of your pockets, and put them on your Hands. I Am afraid, if I
should take this Rogue into Company, I should be troubled to teach him the way
to take off his Hat


Then the Rascals Peruke never stands the right way; and he makes legs so like
a Logger-head, that it would be supposed we took him out of a Mill, where he
had learnt to dance of a Malt-horse; for there is not a step that he takes in
his new shoes, but up comes a stone in the pavement


I Will undertake, should he go into a Noble-mans Hall, he would stamp a row of
black and white marble to pieces in less than half a minute: never Horse had
such hoofs


And then he is so great a Sloven, that by that time he has worn these Clothes
but three days, they will be laced with all manner of liquour, and as greasy as
his old ones are, that the Rats have, since he left them off, run away with


Talk on, Gentlemen, talk on; Cloth me thus but once a Month, and I Will for
ever allow you the same privilege you now take of prating. Forgive me, dear
Patron, for I cannot choose but laugh at you, and that idle fellow, as a couple
of very impertinent fopps


Ned Lovewell, how do do, Boy? now I like thee; now thou look like thy
self. Faith, I was resolved to find thee out, and to new-furnish thee at my own
charge; thou will not believe how sad I have been e're since I saw thee last.
Let me look round about thee; faith, it is mighty rich: prithee what did it
stand thee in? If I can serve thee in any thing, as far as my small Estate
goes, it is all at thy Service, sweet Rogue


And I Will try you, Sir, since you're in so good a humor.


Pox on him, I thought he would not have fastened; would my words were in again.

Faith, Ned, if it will do thee a kindness, I cannot tell how to deny it. Here
it is, with all my heart


Upon my Honor I Will see it safe returned, and esteem it a very great favor.


Faith, Sir, you have done us a very considerable kindness; and in requital,
command me any thing


Sir, if you -- 'Slife, I shall be undone; I was going to offer him as much
more, who would, certainly, have accepted it as the first

Sir, I rejoice I had it to serve you.


Sir, I hope we shall live to be grateful, and find a way to make you
satisfaction for this more than ordinary favor


Sir, there needs none of this. But let me tell you one thing, without offense.


No exception, I assure you, Sir.


Then, faith, I think you become your fine Clothes the worst of any man that
ever wore such


I must confess, Sir, I want the way of wearing Clothes well. I can afford to
let you prate now, but I Will make your purse pay for it


Ned Lovewell, will you assist me in a design? Faith, I am going about to
commit Matrimony. Will you help to make Love to my Mistress? I Will assure you
she is the handsomest Woman within a hundred Mile of her; and a Man that has the
way of giving good words may win her heart, as I am informed, for I never saw
her


How do you know she is so handsome, then?


Why, her Father says so, and sweats he will swinge her, if she refuse to fall
in Love with me, or likes any body else


What need you have any help, then? Your business is done to your hand.


That Is true, Mr. Friendly; but I would fain have it done by fair means; and
there is Ned Lovewell knows how to work upon a Woman at will. I would fain have
him and you go to make up the Match. For his part, he will be company for nothing
but the Horses; we will not have him with us


I am heartily glad the Cur dislikes my Company; since the profit I intend from
him binds me from beating him


Pray, Sir, where lives the Lady, and what is her name? If we can do you any
service, wee're both ready to wait on you


Dear Ned, that is kindly said, and like thy self; and you, Franck Friendly?


Most willingly.


It Is old Pett's Daughter, the East India Merchant; he lives at Hackney.


Say you so, Sir? I doubt I shall set you besides the Saddle: This falls out as
I could wish: This Fool making choice of me to keep him Company, brings me to
kiss the Hand of my fair Mistress, and by that means to manage my affairs as I
could wish


Come, will you go, Gentlemen? I and my Man will walk before you, you may
easily overtake us, for Moses is as stiff as a Tree


We will not fail to follow you.


Lovewell, how like thou this? The Fool comes on finely.


I have a design, Franck, in hand, will make us all men. You know he has made
choice of us to be the means to make his Mistress love him. The same Lady that
he speaks of I have loved long; and she has long loved me


Dear Ned, proceed.


My fortune being spent before I thought on it, my Clothes decayed, and having
little left me to repair my ruins; all my proceedings since have been by
Proxy, excepting now and then a stolen visit over the Garden Wall; which lately
in attempting, I was taken by her Father, and turned out by Grooms; which was
the real cause of my late melancholy


Td's death, then wee're undone; he will know you again, and so we shall be used
worse than you were before


Thy foolish fears, Friendly, have made us fail in many a fair design. Do you
think the old fellow will know him again that he saw before but in half a
Peruke, and not Clothes enough to cover him


God-a-mercy, Blunderbuss, he bolts out sometimes to the purpose. I Will
undertake, Franck, he knows me no more than I should the Grand Seignior, if I
saw him


So the young Squire shall be at the charge of all Entertainments, till you
have found a way to cheat him of his Mistress


Right; now let us follow him. But what shall we do with this Fellow? I Am
certain, should he undertake to walk it, he will flounder with his flat feet; and
we cannot conveniently call for clean Litter for him in a strange House


Pox on you for a couple of Puppys; I know you dare not carry me with you, for
fear of disobliging your Bubble. I Will meet you at Night at the Devil Tavern,
for the Scene is altered since the Money came in; as long as that lasts I Will no
more of the Can Office


A match; so God b'uy, blundering Tom.


Farewell, Fopps.


Gammer Fells, you are a very fidling Woman, and are always worrying me and my
Man for Warrants; what cause of Action have you against these men


Why, an't like your Worship, I have 'em upon suspicions of perjury. It Is well
known to your Worship that I understand the Law; they both swore to me solemnly
by the cross of a Book, that they would pay me my Money on Monday Morning, and
run away on Saturday Night


That Is right, the perjury lies good in that point. But how do you know they
are gone


Why, I Will tell your Worship, without giving your Worship the trouble of many
words, for your Worship knows I am not a Woman of many words: I wish I had
more, for the good of the poor Parish I live in; if I had, I could get Money
enough, by teaching of young Maids to talk at the Bake-house: for indeed, I
help a great many Maids to Services, an't like your Worship, that sometimes are
able to give their Mistresses but sad accounts when they come home


Pray, Gammer Fells, fall to the business, and let me know how you are sure
your Lodgers have quite left you; for if they come again, the perjury is void
in Law


Why, then, I Will tell you, Sir; my Maid peeped through the Keyhole, and see
'em put up all their goods in their pockets; and she is without to justify it


It Is a sign they had a strong Wardrobe.


Why truly, Gammer Fells, that is a very good proof; Stingey, set that down in
your Table Book, that we may make a President of it, for we have many of these
Mystical matters come before us; have you any thing more against these men? for
I find the cause is foul of their sides


Yes, an't like your Worship; they owe me seven shillings for Rent, besides
seven and six pence, for washing Linen; and I hope the Law will allow me
somewhat for the use of my own shift, I lent Mr. Faithful, whilst his was
washed; for I can swear he wore it out extremely


Goody Fells, in that case the Law somewhat differs. For Littleton says, what is
lent is lent. But then there is a Statute of fifty sixth of Queen Elizabeth
that makes some provision in that case. Stingey, what is the Statute in that
case


Why, an't like your Worship, the Statute of Queen Elizabeth is a Statute in
Statu quo; and you know, Sir, that the English of Statu quo is, what you lend,
you lose. Therefore I Am of Mr. Littleton's mind, that what is lent, is lent


Gammer Fells, this is the very Letter of the Law; you must lose the loan of
your smock. I, but I Will make 'em smoke for the rest. Have you made the Warrant,
Stingey


Yes, Sir, here it is.


You must give me a shilling; Woman.


With all my heart, an't like your Worship; without offense to your Worship, I
think I know the price of a Warrant, as well as your Worships self. I think
they are all good, an't like your Worship


Stingey, direct her how to serve it.


Carry it, Gammer Fells, to Mr. Clowt, the Constable; he is a wholesale
Cobbler, and my Masters near Kinsman; he will be careful, for it is of great
concern


Bless your Worship; good buy to your Worship.


Goody Fells, pray do so much as change this farthing, I doubt it is not so
right as it should be


Mr. Thomas, if you be remembered, you left a penny Roll unpaid of your last
weeks breakfasts


Truly, Gammer Fells, I think I did; I Will pay it. Then, Sir, I must have but
five pence


This will prove a crabbed case, Stingey; let us go in, and consider on it: I
protest, it almost confounds me


I wonder Mr. Leftwell comes not.


Sir, here is one Mr. Leftwell desires to see you.


Desire him to walk in. Daughter, remember your Duty, and receive him kindly.


Sir, your Servant; I come to kiss your Hand. Wan't that a-la-mode, Lovewell?


Very well; proceed, proceed.


Sir, I Have made bold to bring my Friends.


Mr. Leftwell, they are welcome for their own sakes, and much more for yours.
Gentlemen, you're welcome; pray be pleased to sit down


Your Servant, Sir.


Pray, Sir, which of these three is my Mistress?


This is my Daughter, Sir.


Faith, Sir, I like this little Gentlewoman as well


O this damned dog! the Devil's in him.


Well then, Lady; since you are she, let me look upon you.


I, pray good Sir, look, before you leap, by all means.


Can you find in your Conscience to affect me? If you cannot, let it alone, I Will
look for some body else; for I suppose, there will be little love lost. Let me
see you look as if you were a little out of your wits. I hear you have a great
deal of wit; I Will try you, look upon that Gentleman, he is able to say more in
half an hour than you can answer in seven year, as wise as you are


Why, has he more wit than you have, Sir?


I, a hundred times, and a hundred to that.


Then I assure you he is too hard for me, for I don't know what to say to you.


I thought I should put you to it But now I Will desire Ned Lovewell to take you
in hand; you shall see how much he can say more than I; I brought him to make
love for me, but in faith, I think I shall scarce find work for my self. Ned,
prithee lend me your place a little, and take you mine


Your Servant, Sir; any thing to satisfy you.


Mr. Pett, you must not be angry, for I am resolved to have your Daughter,
whoever I speak to I Will but make a few pretty pretenses to the rest


I protest, a pretty mettle'd man; I like his humor. I, I, Sir, make your self
as merry as you can


Lady, how do you like me?


So, so; you're a pretty kind of a man, but you wear your Clothes to the worst
advantage that e're I saw; your Bands are quite out of fashion. Why don't you
wear a Cravat? I fancy 'twould become you prettily, let me tie your Band like
one


Pough, let me alone, you will all foul it. I hate this fooling: you think
washing costs nothing. I never saw such a Woman in my life


Then you should wear a lace about your sleeves; this makes you look ugly.


I hope a man may look as he will, and wear what he will, for all you; it costs
you nothing


Nay, it is nothing to me; but before I would wear such shooe-strings, I Would tie
my shoes with blew tape


Prithee, Coz, let the Gentleman alone; he wears what likes him.


I Am glad you're come to my relief, I believe I should have lost all my Clothes
else. I Will tell you this, Mistress; had you been a Man, I Would a taken you over
the face, for all your bravery


There Is a Clown. I protest, Sir, I told him in kindness, never let me live
else


Let me dye, Madam, if I don't think he deserves to be hanged. Was ever such a
dirty Rascal? Ee'ne let him alone, Madam; I would not have you give your self
the trouble to laugh at him


Ned Lovewell, how do you like her? Pray, Sir, let me have her again. Give me
your Hand, I Am a Horse if I don't love you heartily; now do you love me


How can I choose, Sir? every body must love you that looks on you.


Then I Will take your Father aside, and satisfy him how I love you, and what I
intend to settle upon you; and so the work shall be done, before the World's
aware of it. Mr. Pett, I desire to spend half an hour with you in private


With all my heart, Sir; we will walk in, and return presently. Gentlemen,
you will pardon us, business must be done


Sir, we will take a walk in the Gallery till you come again.


Do so, Daughter.


This Fool, Leftwell, produces a brave opportunity to bring Mr. Lovewell and my
Mistress together; which there had been no way to have done without him; I
hope, by this time, the affair is so well settled, that nothing can frustrate
it. This Ass shall never carry her; if he does, both I, and all that are
concerned in the Plot, do undoubtedly deserve a most infamous death

In Love's affairs the Women's wits are best:
I Will Club my share; let Fortune do the rest.

A Way with him, away with him; you're my Prisoner now: I Will have you up for my
Rent, Sirrah, and my poor Maids money out of pocket


Ha, ha, ha.


Bring him away, Captain Clowt; do you see how he laughs at you? Thus he served
me the very Night he run away with his Clothes. Come, Sir, I Will lend you a hand


Mr. Constable, pray whither must I go; and what have you against me?


Why, I have a Warrant against you for Felony, and Perjury.


At whose suit, in the Devil's name?


At this Woman's; who is, Sir, as wise a Woman as any is in this Parish. You had
best compound the business, and make the best of a bad matter


'Sdeath, I Will kick --


How do you say, you will kick me? kick me, Sir! I Would have you to know I am the
Kings Constable, and cannot be kicked by any Christian living


I Will swear I heard him say he would kick ye; this shall come before Justice
Frump, with the rest; I warrant thee that it shall. You kick a Constable of the
Kings, and a Captain of the Trained Bands


Pray, Mr. Constable, give me leave to speak a little.


I tell you as I told you before, I am the Kings Constable; and it is not my
place to give people leave to speak that are my Prisoners. Therefore come on,
Sir; I charge you in the Kings name, to come on


I, I charge you in the Kings Name to come before Justice Frump.


Pray, Goody Fells, what Commission have you to command in the Kings name? Are
you a Constable, Goody Fells? This is very fine, i'saith; I Will have that tried
as soon as e're we come before my Cousin Frump


Well, Sir; you're a Captain, and a Constable; and a poor Woman must not have
the liberty before you to be large in her own business, or else I could say
something. And it is not unknown to some of the Parish, that I understand the
business of a Constable as well as the best Clowt in Christendom


You understand the business of a Constable? Come, I Will put a question to you.
Provided, Gammer Fells, that you were upon the Watch, as I was last night


Well; why, what then? Pray say on, Sir.


Well, and you take a Man upon the Watch. And you take a Man upon the Watch, as
I said before


Under favor, Mr. Clowt, you have said nothing else to the business yet.


Very good; The Man being thus taken, falls to play at Putt with one of the
Watchmen upon the Watch; and falling to play, they fall out; falling out, they
fall together by the ears. Presently the Watchman takes me up a brown Bill,
and beats me out his brains. Now presently after, there comes a Trial between
the Man killed, and him that killed him. Which has the Law o'their side? Now,
Gammer Fells


The Man that was killed fell out with him that killed him; so he that was
killed, was killed Se defeddede; I know what I say, Captain Clowt. I say Se
defeddede; which is to say, much against his will; therefore the Man killed has
the right of the Law against him that killed him


Well, Gammer Fells, you have done more, I protest, than Justice Frump himself
could have done. If my Woman were dead, I would have thee before any Woman in
the World


Land-lady, thou talk of wit enough for a Constable, thou art wise enough to
make a Justice


Why, Sir, there are some Constables have as much wit as some Justices. Pray,
Sir, will you walk on, or I shall be fain to Command you in the Kings name
again


I, Mr. Clowt, I want my Money; pray let us make what haste we can.


We shall drink one glass of Wine before we go.


To do you a kindness, Sir, we will drink one half pint: shall we, Gammer Fells?
But remember, Sir, you threatened to kick me


Now things are in this posture, Mr. Lovewell, pray have a care you put not all
aside by your neglect: my Father (I Am afraid) will make all haste to expedite
this Marriage. In having you, I venture all I have, or hope for; therefore have
a little care extraordinary for her sake that loves you


Let me not live under Heaven's light one minute after I forget the least of
your Commands, from whom I Have had such honors heaped upon me. Can you believe
I can be such a Slave, as to forget that thing is only able to complete my
happiness


I love to hear you say you love me, and it is because I do believe you do so.
Yet I am sad, and shall be, till I have escaped the fears I live in, of being
forced by my too rigorous Father to be fettered to this fool of Men


Madam, when they come back, then we shall find how far they have proceeded; by
that we may know which way to order our affairs; of which I shall not fail by
Letters to acquaint you constantly


My Father will have such an eye over me, that I Am afraid I shall scarce er'e
be out of's sight. He has been strangely Jealous and Inquisitive e're since he
saw us in the Garden last (though now I think he knows you not again) therefore
I doubt it will be very hard to have a Letter brought without his knowledge


Betty and I have made a bargain will prevent all fear; my Man is to pretend
Marriage to her; by which means, he may still find admittance, and make her
sensible, and she you, of all my Actions, and designs: which will be weak
indeed, if not able to outdo all that your old Father, and that Young Fool can
e're contrive


I like that well. Now, Cousin Fickle, how do you find the Gentleman? Is he
well fitted? Have you looked over his Linen


How do you find your Friend, Cousin Let? Does he woe hard for Mr. Lovewell? I
doubt he has been about his own business, I should like him the worse else, and
forget him (I mean the Fool) that threatened to beat me for advising him to wear
lace about his sleeves


Shall I cut his tongue out for it, Madam?


For Heaven's sake do, Mr. Friendly; I Will love you as long as I live, if you
will. I believe, Cousin, my Uncle and he will make the match against to morrow
Morning, then thou art miserable: faith, rather then so, let us rise up before
he comes. Thou shall Marry Mr. Lovewell, and I Will ee'ne take Mr. Friendly here


A match, Cousin Mad-Cap; but I doubt you cannot keep your word, nor live so
long in one mind. I protest, if thou should, I would swear thou were never
true to any thing, but Matrimony


Dear Madam, let me kiss this hand for that kind contrivance.


Nay, one shall not mock the other; both, or none, Sir.


Both, a thousand times together; but here they come.


I am sorry we have made you stay thus long, Gentlemen; but Mr. Leftwell and I
have done a good work since we went: we have set an end to wooing. Daughter,
you're allowed but two days to prepare for Marriage, and making of Wedding
Clothes. I hope these Gentlemen will dance at the Wedding


I faith, Ned, and Franck, the Lady there must Marry me, whether she will or
no. Why, you must, Mistress, for all you look so. You two shall be my
Bride-men, shall not they, Father Pett


What you please for that, Son; the Gentlemen look like civil men, and will do
very well


Sir, Dinner waits on your Worship.


Come, Gentlemen, will you walk in?


Was ever Man made thus Drunk by a Cuckoldly Constable, and an Old Apple-Woman?
Captain Clowt, the Kings Constable, lend me your Commanding Staff to lean upon.
Let me see, you laid out all


Not all; Gammer Fells paid eleven pence toward the last Reckoning.


Captain Clowt, you're a drunken Dog, and I defy you, and there is an end of the
Story; therefore stand further off. What place it this? where are we


Why, this is the Worshipful Justice Frump's House; an Honorable Gentleman he
is, I hope he will hamper you, in faith. If he don't set you in the Stocks for
being drunk, and put you into Prison for my Money, he is not the Man I took him
for


This Old Trot has not drunk her tongue out of rune yet. You Hell-Cat, with
your Hoggs face, I Will so feague you with this faggot-stick.


O, O, O.


O, say you so, Sir; I see, what e're your Nose is made of, you have a tongue
in your Head. What white-liver'd logger-head are you


How now, Cousin Clowt? I see you are an honest man, and careful in your
Office. Is this the Malefactor


An't like your Worship, Sir, this is the Man that made promise of Marriage to
the Maid, borrowed her Money, cheated the Mistress, wore out her own Shift, now
does, or lately did wear out her Husbands Shirt, sinfully swore to pay her her
Rent one night, and shamefully run away, without any regard to his Oath, the
next Morning. There lies the perjury, an't like your Worship


Good Mr. Clowt, give me leave to speak in my own cause; I think I understand
the Law a little better than a Man that has not been above a Month in his
Office


Gammer Fells, you're a Fool in matters of Law; you know little of that:
therefore I say, that I ought (being an Officer of State) to have the
privilege of speaking, before any Woman that wears a Head


Cousin Clowt, go on; let me have a full of the business, that I may proceed to
Sentence


Mr. Justice, I shall wring you by the red Nose, if you listen to that
Logger-head any longer, before you hear me speak. Therefore let us have a Bottle
of Sack, and so conclude the business


Bottles of Sack will not pay me my Rent, nor repair my Linen, nor take up the
Perjury; and that is the point I insist upon


Why, you pernicious old Whore you; wherein am I perjured?


How, de'e call Whore in the face of Justice? Gammer Fells, bring your Action,
I Will bear you out on it. Sir, I Will tell you the Law as to matter o'that. But
hold, let us proceed to the first Indictment. Stingey, read the Indictment


YOu stand here charged, by the name of Thomas Faithful, at the Suit of Cicily
Fells, of the Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex,
Widow; for Perjury, and breach of promise to the Maid of the said Cicily, in
point of Marriage, and the Sum of seven shillings, and six pence, with lawful
Interest and damages for the forbearance thereof: for Lodging had at the House
of the said Cicily; and moreover, in the sum of seven shillings of like Money,
for Laundry work done by the said Cicily

Well, well; I Will pay it all. Little Ananias, you and I will go to a Wench.


Pray, Sir, let me alone; I am none of those you take me for: I go to a Wench?
I Would rather dye than look upon a lewd Woman, in the way of wickedness


Sir, guilty, or not guilty?


Honest old Rascal, do one thing well in thy life, and lend your man Money to
go with me, and have a leap; I Will never let go his Ear else


Sir, I protest, let go my Man's Ear, and plead, or I Will have you pressed.


Pray, Sir, let go my Ear, or in earnest I Will bring my Action.


Gammer Fells, awake, and hear the Judgment of the Court.


Tell not me of Judgment; let me have my Money, and the Man Married to my Maid,
the King paid for the Perjury, and Mr. Clowt paid for his pains


His Worship must give Judgment, before the Malefactor can make payment, Gammer
Fells


I, Goody Fells, pray be patient; fair and softly goes far, they say. Sir, you
hear that your faults are of a high Nature; I Will tell you the letter of the Law
in those cases you are now accused for. Plowden says, in his Pleas, and
Reports, that, for Perjury, you ought to pay five shillings to the Justice you
are brought before, and half a Crown to his Clerk. For Perjury is, Corpus cum
eausa, by the Statute of the Three and Thirtieth of King James


Plowden's a Puppy, and you're an Owl; and I Will see you hanged, and the Devil
ride your starved Clerk Hackney to Hell, before you shall have one penny of me.
Justice, prithee, send for a Pint of Wine


Sir, ask any learned Lawyer about Town, they will tell you, that Plowden was no
Puppy; pray, Sir, pay but me and my Man the Money the Statute allows us, and
I Will give you time for the payment of this poor Woman and her Maid


Will you, faith, Justice Frump? That is fine, Justice Frump: shall I be fobb'd
off now with a promise of payment? Did I put my Cause into your hands for help,
and you to put the perjury Money into your own pocket? are you willing,
forsooth, that I must lie by the loss? Is this Justice? No, it is Jewishly done


To him, Gammer Fells, to him, to him.


Gammer Fells, let me have my Money, and I Will take a course for yours. Pray,
Sir, will you satisfy me and my Man, and pay for the Perjury


Will your Worship be pleased to hear me?


If you have any thing to say for your felf, why Sentence should not pass upon
you, pray speak, and remember the payment of the perjury Money. If I have not it,
it is so much Money out of mine, and my Man's pocket, I protest to you; and
that is all the Woman stands upon


It Is false; and your Worship is little better than a Liar in saying so: it is
my own Money I want


Woman, Woman, let your betters be served before you.


Mr. Justice, you promised to hear me speak; pray be as good as your Word.


You have liberty to say any thing, so it be to the purpose; and pray remember
the perjury Money. Woman, you shall have satisfaction


Then, let but Chitterlin-Chops, your Man, here, go but with me to a
Bawdy House, and I Will send you your Money due upon the perjury; my Land-lady
shall have satisfaction, and I Will Marry he Maid. I Will play your Puppy but one
hit


Take your Cloak, Stingey, and go along with the Gentleman; it is a case of
necessity, and no sin; for we shall lose seven shillings, and six pence, else;
consider, Stingey, seven, and six pence, is Money


Now, I Will see you all burned first, and so take your Course.


Stingey, make his Mittimus; and away with him, Cousin Clowt.


I made the Mittimus before, an't like your Worship.


Stingey, make him pay for it, and bring me in my part. Cousin Clowt, take care
of him; for I Am resolved to hamper him


Come along, Sir; once more I charge you in the Kings name.


Pray, Sir, pay me for making the Mittimus.


I, Codds head, come hither -- Be a good Husband, and keep this till I come
again


O Lord, how shall I answer this to my Master?


Bring him along; I Will never leave you, till I see him safe.


Gentlemen, I wish your Cheer had been better; but expecting none but my Son
Leftwell, I have provided less than I should have done, had I had warning of
your good Company


Sir, your Entertainment has been like your self, most truly generous and Noble.


I vow, Father, I have spent a shilling many a time for a dinner, between Moses
and I, and have not dyn'd half so well


This is a very pleasant Garden, Sir; and that row of Trees adds much to the
beauty of the House


Sir, I believe 'twould be very pretty, if the Plot were altered, and the Trees
taken down at the end, and a gravel Walk made


If the Trees were removed to day at thy Request, Niece, to morrow thou
would wonder why they were taken down, and be for transplanting them again
some where else. I Am confident thou would not like them half an hour in any
place; therefore, prithee leave thy prating


I perceive by your humming (Mr. Lovewell) you Sing well, therefore let me
engage you to give us a Song, whilst we sit down in yonder Arbor. Nay, I will
not be denied; and my Cousin here, in requital, shall give you another


If you love me, honest Ned, do my Mistress that kindness. Come, don't be out
of Countenance, Man. Why, there is no harm in singing in Civil Company; is
there, Father Pett


No, truly, Son, I think not.


Sir, to serve you and your Lady that must be, I would sing till I had lost my
Lungs; but I am so unfitting now. Madam, your Ladyship must undergo the whole
brunt of the business


Well, Ned, when wee're alone, that word shall be something in thy way, I Will
assure thee, take my word for it; he has a Cold, and cannot sing. Pray sing you,
forsooth


Yes, pray oblige us.


Sir, we believe your excuse just, and another time shall serve.


Honest Ned, let me tell thee, thou sing'st as well as any Man in the World,
when thou art well; would I were a Woman, for thy sake. Thou art a sweet Rogue.
Have a kindness for him, dear Mistress


Ladies, I fear if I had sung, I should have made your Heads ache, for all Mr.
Leftwell's Commendations; but let me beg the performance of your promise, Madam


Prithee, let us have the Song you sung to us last night; I like it very well.
Come, no excuses, but do it


Since, Madam, there is no way to avoid it, I Will obey your Commands. But I hope,
Gentlemen, you will not be angry with me for making a noise


Pretty Mistress, make an end of the Prologue, and come to the matter.


What say you, Gentlemen, how do you approve of my Kinswomans Voice?


As I hope to live, Madam, your Voice would invite me from my Prayers to listen
to it, were I sure not to live above half an hour after


P'shaw, waw, wherein is her Voice so good, as to persuade you into an Opinion
on it; I have heard a Hogg, when a Mastiff Dog has hung at his Ear, make better
Music: I wish her Song were in her guts, so we had one of Ned Lovewell's


Mr. Leftwell, you do her wrong, to say she Sings not well; besides, it calls
your Judgment in question


I think I should have as much Judgment in Singing, as another Man, for my
Father taught me for two years together; there is not an old Song that ever was
made, but I can sing it


Pray, Mr. Leftwell, will you oblige me, and the rest of the Company, with any
one you can conveniently spare, now we are in the Singing humor


For thy sake, my Sweet heart that is, and my Wife that must be, I will sing,
say, or do any thing


Pray, Sir, Sing then; she desires you that you would.


O good Sir, let us hear your Song.


Not for your sake, Mistress; for you're to be my Maid within these two days;
and shall I do any thing at the request of my own Servant? No, I scorn it


But Madam Leticia, your Mistress, and I, your Friend, desire it; pray, Sir,
let us live no longer in Expectation


WHen as King Henry Ruled this Land,
The Second of that Name;
Besides the Queen, He dearly loved
A Fair, and Princely Dame.
Most Peerless was her, etc.
No more of your Ballad; I protest my brains are ready to split: I had rather
be tied to a load of Iron, and be drawn after it quite through London, than
hear your Servant sing such another Sonner


You're a foolish Gitle; this was one of the prettyest Songs in London, when I
came to Prentice first. You don't know what a Song is; Sing on, Son


Her Favor, and Her Face:
A Sweeter Creature in the World
Did never Prince Embrace.
It Is true, the Song is good, Sir; but Mr. Leftwell's Voice is at present, a
little out of Tune; and so if he pleases, we will have the rest another time


Indeed, I have got a kind of a Cold; but when ever (if thou have a mind to
hear it) it is all at thy Service. When we two are abed together, I Will lull thee
asleep every Night, and wake thee every Morning with my Voice, because I see
thou delight'st in it


Without doubt, as much as I do to hear a little Boy beat upon a Bartholomew
Drum


Father, I must be forced to take my leave of you; I have a House to Let, in
Long-Acre, that calls me away (as a Man may say) Nolens, Volens, from you


Nay, pray, Sir, stay, and take a small Supper here too; you and your Friends
shall be as welcome as I know how to make you; ye shall have a good Bed, and
clean Sheets; so much I dare promise you


Nay, if you promised a thousand things, I must go when I have business to do,
and there is an end of it; and so, your Servant, Sir. Good b'uy, my Dear;
prithee don't take on, I Will be here again to morrow morning. It Is to no purpose
to grieve, you will get nothing by that but your labor for your pains, in a
manner. Let me entreat you to take this parting partiently


Sir, I Will assure you I Will keep my heart as whole as I can till I see you again.


Gentlemen, your Servant; we will wait on you to the Door. Sir, I hope you and
your Friend will do my Son the kindness, to undergo the Office of Bride-men


Sir, I shall be proud to have the honor of such Services.


Sir, I do equally esteem my happiness with his; and will not fail to pay my
due attendance


Your Servant, Sir; may you live long, and happy.


Did you see my Man Moses, Mrs. Betty?


Yes; he, and old Ralph, were drunk an hour before Dinner; and are gone to
sleep


Pray, when the Rogue wakes, bid him roll home after me.


Now will I prepare my old Master to License my Young Lover to the freedom of
Visiting me; by which the whole design cannot choose but take effect

Assist us, Cupid, for thou know it is fit
Beauty, and Youth, should be rewards of wit.

FRanck, the Fool comes on as I could wish; h'as sent me a Letter, wherein, he
swears he loves me most monstrously: some way we must find out to get more
money from him, the better to enable us to cheat him of his Mistress


My little Mad-Cap swears she will have me at the same time when you have yours.
And if her kindness but continue, I shall believe my self a happy Man; for as I
live, I love her infinitely. But prithee let us see Leftwell's Letter


He Will be here presently, he sends me word; but since you love to read a
well-penn'd Letter, this is it, Sir


AFter my hearty Commendations, my love remembered unto you, etc. I desire that
you would prepare your self; and get Franck to do the same (viz.) to be my
Bride-men; for my Mistress vows she will not have me, unless I can get you to
be as good as your word. I would not have you fail me, for five hundred pounds;
for if you do, I shall lose a Wife worth ten Thousand. And so I res

Your Dutiful Friend, Leftwell.

Here Is an Epistle, with a pox; did ever man see such a Puppy?

But now, suppose we should pretend our Chambers were robbed when we went with
him to Hackney, of the Money that should have furnished us with Clothes, and
necessaries, to have attended at his Wedding. What say? Wilt do well


By this light, nothing like it; is he to meet you here?


So the Messenger said.


I Will immediately put my self into a melancholy posture; but I Am afraid thou wilt
never counterfeit well


O! feat not that. Hold, here comes the Cuckco -- let us seem not to see him.


Why Ned! why Franck! why Franck! why Ned! You see I Am not worse than my word.
I Am just for Hackney now, the Wedding Clothes are gone before; once more, I beg
you not to fail me


I, Sir, would willingly perform what Service my ability can reach to; and so,
I Am certain, would Franck here; but --


But what? why, what is the matter, Man? Why, thou art grievous Melancholy.
Prithee, tell me what is the matter


Alas, Sir, 'twill but trouble you to hear your Friend's misfortunes.


For my part, Sir, I grieve not at my own, I could laugh at them; but that I
should fail you, it makes me almost mad


Prithee, dear Ned, tell me what is the matter; I protest, you make tears stand
in my eyes: let me know the cause quickly, or I shall cry outright. I would
not, I protest, for a thousand pounds, you should fail me; I shall lose such a
fortune, I shall never have again


That Is the greatest of my grief; that you, my Friend, from whom I have found
such favors, should be so great a loser in my ill luck. 'Sdeath, I could kill
my self


O, for the love of God, good Gentlemen, as you love me, and as you love your
Mistresses, let me know what troubles you; I protest, I Will tear my Periwigg to
pieces else. Ned Lovewell, will you tell me or no? or I will tear


Dear Friend, put on your Periwigg; to see you in this passion, adds to my
sorrow; and should I tell you now, I know your good nature would lead you to
repair our losses, which I hate the very thought of, knowing how far we are
already engaged to your Liberality


The Coxcomb, I find, will be wrought upon. Dear dissimulation, how I love thee!


Never speak of that, man; if Money will make up the matter, never be
melancholy; I have just now received two hundred Guineys for the Fines of four
Houses


But with what confidence can I do this? Pray, Sir, pardon me.


By this hand, either let me know what it is that troubles ye, and take my Money
to make up the matter, or I Will never come near you more, though I know I shall
lose my Mistress by it. I thought you had had more kindness for me, than to
hinder me thus of a Fortune; now you have wooed her for me


Well, Sir; since nothing will satisfy you, the case is thus. That day we went
with you to Hackney, our Lodgings were broke open, and robbed of all our laced
Linen, and almost two hundred pounds besides; so that we shall want Money, and
all things else, to furnish us to do you Service in that garb we willingly
would, had not this strange misfortune hindered our Intentions


P'shaw, and is this all? Look, here is all the Money I have about me: I Will send
Moses home for more


Alas, dear Sir, half this will serve; pray pardon me: but since you will have it
so


Why should it not be so? I say, it shall be so. Go home, Moses, fetch the
Purse that lies behind the Cabinet. I Will away to Hackney; you will come on
Thursday, before nine a Clock


Sir, we will be there before you are up, I warrant you. I do assure you I know
not what to say, that may in the least make satisfaction for so great a favor


Sir, I am equally unhappy in the want of words, to express my gratitude.


Pugh, I cannot Complement; you have got it, and much good may it do you; and so
farewell


Dear Ned, let me spit in thy Mouth for thy Ingenuity; faith, 'twas very well
done


As I live, it went against my Conscience all the while I was about it; and I
strangly wonder I went so well through with it, to wheedle a Man out of his
Money, and cheat him of his Mistress too; it is enough to damn an honest Man to
do it, and make a wise Man mad to undergo it


'Twere honest in no case but this; for this is but easing of a Brute with half
a Soul, of a few of his Fathers sins; and besides, if we get these Fortunes, we
may pay him his Money again. Then, for his Mistress (if she were his, as she is
yours) you do a deed of Charity, to preserve her from being bound to a Fool;
besides --


Enough, enough, Franck; these Reasons are sufficient to resettle my struggling
Conscience


But now, what is to be done, as to the Ladies? they live in expectation of
relief from us; and I long to know a way to send it them


I Have made Runwell our Agent here; and we shall have by him the Course we are
to steer. The Ladies will give full directions by him


Friend, lies your business with any here?


I have a Letter for one Mr. Lovewell.


I am the Man; whence comes it?


The Letter, Sir, will give you satisfaction.


It Is Faithful's Character, I think.


Dear Ned, WHen this Letter finds you, come to my Relief as soon as you can;
for I am crammed into a little Room in New Prison, where I am like to be
overrun with Lice, and stifled with stinking Tobacco. Tell Franck Friendly,
that I was taken upon a Warrant, at the Suit of our Landlady Fells, for Rent;
and committed by one Justice Frump: but the Keeper says, he will let me out
upon any Bail; provided, I pay my Fees. So fail not, dear Friend, with all
speed, to rescu

Your Servant, Thomas Faithful.

O that damned Justice! he once committed me, for pissing under his Window.


Prithee, Franck, leave prating; and let us haste, to help the poor Rogue.


Was there ever such a Toothless Trot, as this? who the Devil put it into her
mind? But let us stay no longer


Cousin Fickle, there is nothing in the World makes me admire more, than to see
thee so long in one mind; that thou should love one Man two days together,
is little less than a Miracle


And nothing but a Miracle can make me miss him, as we have laid the Plot. If
they come according to our appointment, we will be Married two hours before my
Uncle, and the intended Bridegroom, are awake; but should I miss him to
Morrow, I Would have him the next place I meet him in. My Uncle cannot hinder me,
though he may you; nor shall, from marrying any Man that I affect


O Coz, that I were but in thy Condition; and as free from the fear of a
Father! but I Vow, my heart begins to fail me; if we play this trick to Morrow,
when he misses us, he will certainly run stark mad; and turn me off, without a
penny Portion


Dear Girl, fear not that; he may be angry for a Month, or so, but no longer;
for he has never another Child. Nature will engage him to come about again, and
give thee all; he will be as kind as ever, never fear it. However, will thou
weigh thy Fathers anger, in comparison, with the loss of gentile Mr. Lovewell?
Let me dye, if I am not ashm'd to see thee have such idle fears


The Scene is strangely altered; when thou come to counsel any body to Love
and Constancy; but Coz, do think thou can continue this humor, till to
Morrow


Leave your tatling; for I question your resolution more than you need mine; I
could find in my heart not to let you go to Bed to Night, lest you should lie
too long in the Morning


Nay, I will never be outdone by thee, in point of promise; I will be up, and
ready to meet him; go, and be immediately Married to him, though I turn
Seamstress for my Living. Therefore come along, Girl


Said like thy self, sweet Coz; if it be done to Morrow, we will laugh one Day,
let what will follow


Have you fully instructed Betty, that she may satisfy Mr. Lovewell's Man, the
time and place they are to meet us in? You know I left all that to your care:
has she the Letter for him


To the full, fear not: let us in, and put our Jewels up; for if the Old Man
proves unkind, they may stand thy Friends; I Am sure he must pay me my Portion


Mr. Runwell, I have got such a bundle of business here will make you mad to
carry it, and your Master mad with joy to hear it. Tell him, and Mr. Friendly,
that the Ladies desire their Companys by four a Clock to morrow Morning, at the
corner of our back-gate, with a Coach. But here is two Letters, which if you
give your Masters, will save you the trouble of telling a long Story. So pray
be careful, and farewell


Mrs. Betty, Mrs. Betty; unless you pity me, my Master has utterly undone me.


Why, what is the matter, man?


Here he has set me to woo in jest, and I Am in love in earnest. Unless you
think you can love me, I am bound to wish I had never seen you; for I find in
my self I cannot live without you


O, if that be all, leave it to me; and as I find your care in your Masters
concerns, so you shall find my love toward you, if you are in earnest. Fare
you well, Sir


This is short, and sweet; it savours something of kindness: but what I should
do with a Wife if I had one, I can no more tell, than a Tailor knows how to
make a Horse-shooe. And yet I love this little Rogue so well, that I must have
her, though Ruin were sure to follow: however I hope my Master, when he has
got his Mistress, will help us out at a dead lift. But I must make haste


Ho! where are you Ralph? is the Cook come?


Yes, Sir.


Bid him come to me; Betty, do you get Mrs. Snuff, the Housekeeper, to make
the Wedding Bed, she knows what belongs to such matters; and look that the
Hangings in the Matted Room be brusht down, and the Chare-Woman rub the rest of
the Rooms. Let every thing be done in Order

Pray, Mr. Lard, look that every thing you undertake be done decently; spare
for no cost, but call for every thing you want. I would not be niggardly at the
Wedding of my only Child. Has Mr. Plume, the Poulterer, sent the Crammed Capons,
the tame Pigeons, and the Partridges. And, Betty, step to the Butler, and see
whether he has Bottel'd the two Tearces of Claret, and the half Pipe of Canary.
Pray look about you, and let every thing be done that may adorn the House


Sir, let me have but Meat enough, and things convenient to carry on the work
of the day, if I don't lick my fingers after the French Mode, and make sauce as
well as any Man of my Profession, let me be put into Pye-Crust, and sent a
Sacrifice to the unappeas'd Stomachs of unsatiate Serving-men


Sir, I Will see that every thing be ready to your satisfaction, as far as I Am
concerned, and look that the Bride be dressed before Eight of the Clock, or the
Cook shall cut me into Steaks and Stew me


God-a-mercy, good Girl; get thee about thy business then, for thou have a
great deal to do

Mr. Lard, question not but you shall have every thing, to furnish out a Feast
for the Entertainment of a King. Command what is necessary for the Kitchen


Let me alone, then; I Will warrant your Worship.


Good Morrow, Father; pray, how does your Head?


Very well, Son; pray, why do you ask?


Only to be satisfied, Sir, because mine aches, and turns round, as if 'twere
about to look for another seat, and would take leave of my shoulders; why,
there is not a pair of hands in the House but what is in motion, to make as much
noise as they can; all the great Guns in a Sea Fight sing treble, in comparison
of the Thundering base that Reigns in every Room here. Pray, Sir, what is your
design in this? Do you intend to make me mad before I Am Married


No, Sir; but I have a design to have my House set in Order, and to make
provision for those that shall entertain you and your Bride to Morrow; and do
you think this can be done without noises? I warrant you would have had the
Victuals sent to the next door to be dressed, and so brought through the Street
to the Table. Pray, Son, if the noise be so troublesome to you, let you and I
go to the backside of the House, and play a game at Tables; are you for Irish,
or Backgammon


No, Sir, I have sworn never to throw a Dye more, though I have played at
Dublits, and losing Lodum, before now; but I have quite left off Gaming. I care
not, if I go up stairs, and see my Mistress; A Man goes in danger of his life
here below: I, by chance, looked but into the Kitchen, and one of the Cooks
took me for a Calf, I believe; and in spite of my teeth would needs spit me.
Then my shins have been broke three times to day, by straggling Stools that
stepped out of the places they stood in this seven years, and lay now where I
never looked for 'em. I had like to have had my face washed too, by the Fellow
that cleans the Wainscoat; his Cloth was within an ace of my Nose


Well, Son, there is no help for these things; but since you have made choice
of your Mistress for your Protectress, you may find her, and my Niece Fickle,
together at the Chamber at the end of the long Gallery


How now, Tom, Revelling?


O, are you come? By your favor, fellow Prisoners, I must spoil the Dance.


Garry this Crown to the poor Prisoners; farewell, Friend. Are you fully
satisfied


He is discharged, and may go when he pleases.


Lord, Ned, how this Fellow looks! Let me see, what does he look like?


Why, faith, he looks like a poor Whore, turned out of an Inns of Court, half
drunk, at four a Clock in the Morning


Or like a Gypsy, that has been let down a Chimney, and drawn up again with a
Gammon of Bacon at her Breech


Why, Gentlemen, had you been where I was, it would have made you look a little
uglier than ordinary


If thou were but a little uglier than ordinary, as thou say, a man might
endure to look on thee, Tom; but, as I live, thy Face looks just of the color
of a Red-herring, and thy hands like a Sailors, that have been steept two days
in Tarr and Tallow. And any body will swear, by thy Linen, thou have robbed a
French Lacquey


This Fellow stinks so of Tobacco, that there is no way to make him smell
sweet, and look like a man, but to take him down to the Thames, and have him
drawn twice, or thrice, cross the Water at the tail of a Sculler


Say you so, Signior Snowt? if you bee'nt smoak-dry'd in the same place before
you have washed your Hands for to morrow's Dinner, I Will be bound to hang for you


Why, was there ever such a simple sot as thou art? To have money in thy
pocket, and be sent to Prison for fourteen shillings: Why the Devil did you not
pay it? but it may be you had a mind to see the Lodging you must last live in


If you had given her the money, she had no more to do with you; one would
imagine you want brains as well as money; but perhaps you have a fancy to be
lousy: But we will let that pass. Look, here is more money, Tom


What, from the same hand, Ladds?


This is nothing; there is that in hand will make us all happy:


If that which is in hand will not, I don't know what will: come, what designs
have you, let me know all


Come, we will trust you for once; we two are to be married to morrow to two of
the greatest Beauties and Fortunes within twenty miles


Where, and to whom, dear Rogues, tantalize me no longer?


Faith, Tom, I don't know yet my self; but here comes one, I believe, will
better inform me; what news, Runwell


Sir, I must have leave to take breath, before I can tell my tale; you must be
by four a Clock to morrow morning, and Mr. Friendly with you, at the Corner --
But here is a Letter will fully inform you; and here is one for you, Sir


By this hand, Franck, I Am afraid to look into mine, lest there should be less
in it than I expected


I Am under the same sense of fear; prithee, Ned, open thine, and put me out of
pain


It Is better to know a man's Fate, than fear it: I Will venture.


SIR, BE sure you fail not to meet me, and Mr. Friendly my Cousin Fickle, at
the Corner of our Garden in the green Meadow, about four of the Clock to Morrow
Morning: Provide your Parson ready at some Church in London, that may do the
business, without delay. My Consin is as well resolved for Mr. Friendly, as I
am for you

Your Servant, L. P.
Pray send back your Man, that he may be with Betty; so if the business should
fail, he may be able to help us


Mine is, Franck, as I could wish; how sounds thine?


There Is all the harmony of love in it; but Ned, what shall we do for a Levite?


Leave that to me; I Will provide Old Legit, the Reader, who is in Orders, and
will do the business as fast as a Bishop, and tie you together to Eternity. And
I can borrow the Keys of the Sexton of St. Giles's for less than five
shillings, and a full Flaggon of mild Beer. Therefore bear up, Boys


You're sure you can do this; if you fail us, wee're all undone.


Consider, Tom, our business is your own; for as the case stands with us, so it
does with you; either happy, or miserable


Trouble your self no further; if I fail, one of you shall have my Ears, and
the other my eyes. So farewell, Friends; I Will about it instantly


Run you back to Betty, and stay there till you hear from me.


I fly, Sir.


Franck, go you and provide the Coach, and I Will make every thing else ready:
meet me to night at the Devil Tavern, there we will stay till two a Clock, and
so set forward


I Will not fail.


I should take it very kindly, Mr. Leftwell, if you would go now, and give me
leave to go to bed


Your Bride will never get up to morrow morning to be married, if you keep her
up so late to night. Pray, Mr. Leftwell, leave us


I will not go till I please: may not I do what I will, if I have a mind to it, with
my own Wife? I believe my Father would give me leave to lie with her to night,
if I asked it


What, before you are married? That would be a sight worth seeing indeed.
In Faith, if you will not go down, Mr. Leftwell, I shall make bold to beat you down
with the Bed-staffs: What, I Am sure my Old Master did not send you up to day at
Noon, to see us a bed. Will you be gone, and give my Mistress leave to go to
Bed? I shall beat you down with the Bed-staff else


Hold^ Betty, don't beat him, we will persuade him civilly. Pray, Mr. Leftwell,
be Civil, and do not undertake to stay longer, where it cannot be allowed of
with modesty


Lord, Sir, is your Stomach so great, that you cannot stay till to morrow Night,
and so take lawful Possession? but press in in an illegal manner into a place
a day before you have a privilege. I assure you, the World will think you want
wit strangely in attempting it


Well, if I don't go down, and do your Etrand to my Father, Mistress, let me
live lousy, and dye upon a Dunghill. For your part, I shall turn you out of
Service to Morrow


Now he is gone, let us not trouble our selves to talk of him, but make
provision for the Morning's Adventure. It Is now almost twelve, and you know
they will be at the back-gate by four a Clock in the Morning; and should we spend
that time idly, it is ten to one, but it may bring us to repentance, by unkindly
failing our Gallants. Therefore let us fall to packing up those little things we
have, to help us in necessity; then sleep an hour or two


I protest, I Will not go to Bed for all the World; if I do, I shall certainly
lose my Lover, I always wake so late a mornings. But if Betty will sit up, and
promise to wake us, we will lie down in our Night-Gowns till that time


With all my heart, Madam; I Am an errant Slut, if I would not, to promote this
business, sit six days, and as many nights, up to the Chin in Water, this cold
Weather. For I have such a Faith in both the Gentlemen, that I am very
confident they will make you happy


Betty, thou shall not fail to share in my good fortune; and now go to your own
Chamber, and be sure to call us in time. You know what you have to do; stay
behind with Runwell, and be the first that misses me; and do it with all the
passion imaginable; so you will be unsuspected


Madam, I had rather punish my self in being absent from you (since it is your
command) than be wanting in any Service I may possibly do you


That Is my good Girl; but let me kiss thee first for good lucks sake.


Good night, good Ladies.


Now, Cousin, we are alone, what is to be done?


Let Us sleep two hours, and rise before the Sun.


COachman, stay you there, stir not till we come back. It Is devilish dark,
Ned; not so much as a Star stirring


And cruel cold, Franck; if my love wan't very hot, 'twould never hold out the
battery of this bitter Morning. If the poor Ladies are abroad, I Am sorry for
them, I fear it bites them severely. Prithee where art? can thou not keep
close


Why, I am by you here; but know not in what place.


Faith, I thought I smelt you; but come nearer, I Will be a little unkind to my
Nose, and keep you Company at present, for want of a sweeter. But hold, I
think, wee're near the place appointed: prithee, come up; is not that the
Garden Wall


You may as well persuade a blind man to do you the kindness, to draw your
Picture, as to ask my opinion now; for I can no more see thy hand, than I can
my own face; nor can thou see any thing, unless thou have changed eyes with a
Cat. But hark, I hear some body, and see a light yonder


Cupid be kind to you, and lend you a lanthorn, it is cruel dark: good Ladies,
keep your Gowns close about you, for I fear youl'le catch cold


Faith, Cousin, I Am afraid to stir; would they were come, I have got the Cramp
in every one of my fingers, with cold; if I stay here but half an hour, I shall
be fitter for burying than Marriage: I Am afraid I shall lose the finger the
Parson is to put the Ring on. Pray Betty, which finger is that


Faith, Madam, I don't know.


Nor I; if I did, I would be sure to keep that from the cold. Cousin Let. thou
look so pitifully, for want of thy Morning's Posset, that, of my Conscience,
I could cry for thee. Give me thy hand, where is it, Girl? Take comfort, I
warrant they come


I dare swear it is they; let us go a little nearer.


Art sure there is never a Ditch in the way? Would we had the Women, and were
well in the Coach again: But give me thy hand, and I Will go with thee


I vow, Cousin, my courage was almost cold; but to see thee so confident in thy
sufferings, or indeed, to do thee Justice, so constant; I now believe it a mere
shame to come short of thee. Whatever happens, I Am resolved to stay here till
they come, not to be unfix'd in my Resolutions


Poor Mistress, I should question the Justice of the gods, should they forget
to be your Friends, and fail to help you; nay, I should think they had forgot
to further goodness, if they should let you be a loser, in prosecution of so
pure a love


Never fear, Betty, we will through now, though froward Fate had sworn to set a
stop to it. But hark, I hear the steps of some body: would I knew who they
were; it startles me


O, Coz, now thou art faint-hearted again; it is nothing but the leaves of the
Trees that hang over the Garden Wall. Let Us walk a little further forwards


There Is a Candle, Lovewell; let us look a little nearer: stay, is not that
Leticia


And I am monstrously mistaken, if that ben't thy Mistress, and Betty that
holds the light; look, they come nearer


I think I heard some body say, Leticia: and I begin to lose my fear, and will
look a little further. Betty, light hither a little


O Lord, Madam, the Candle's out, I Am undone. I shall never find the way back
to the Gate upon the Cawsey


Madam, Leticia, Lady; here is no body answers. Franck, art sure 'twas they?


No, it may be we saw Angels in their shapes; 'twas either the one, or the
other, I can assure you


No, my dear Lovewell; it is too late to keep at distance, when there lacks so
little time to make us one; here is she that loves thee; and if Heaven were
pleased to lend us light, would joy to look on thee


Sweetest Leticia, why art thou shrouded in this sheet of darkness, that ought
to fear, and fly from such a Face, though it presumes on all the earth
besides? Speak but once more, that I may find thee by thy Voice; since my eyes
are unserviceable


Ned, Ned, have you found your Mistress? If you have, lend me your hand to find
mine; for I dare as well be hanged, as stir a foot further than the place I Am
in: I Am just now up to the belly in the Horse-pond


Hold, Mr. Lovewell, let me call her: Coz, Coz.


Lord, where are you? I hear Mr. Friendly make sad complaints, but I protest I
don't know where to find him. Are you hereabouts, Cousin


I, where is your hand?


Here, and here is Betty's; I am glad I have found you: Mr. Lovewell, your
Servant; if you would speak, I should be glad to hear you, for I protest, I
cannot see you


Madam, your most humble Servant; I would Franck Friendly were as near you as I
am: poor Rogue, he lies poring up and down in the dark for you; Franck, Franck


Here, here, at hand; is my dear Mistress near thereabouts?


She Is here, with Madam Let. and Betty. Thou art the only lost Sheep of the
Company; here, have a care, thou will blunder over some body; prithee, be
careful, take me by the hand


I should be happy if I had it; hold, is not this it.


What do you think?


Faith, I don't know very well; but I Will feel for the Roman T. that will
satisfy me the truth on it


One would have thought the spirit of Jokeing had been drencht out of you in
the Horse-pond; but here is the hand of your fair Mistress


I, here is a hand indeed, makes me forget all wet and cold, and fear of future
Storms


But if you stay much longer here in your wet Breeches, you will remember wet and
cold again, in spite of your Antidote; and I Am so wet with dew, that unless
you make haste, I shall dye before I Am Married; and so be put upon ugly work in
the other World; you have heard the Proverb: and besides, you will lose my
Portion, which is no poor one


Prithee, dear Coz, let us stand no longer in the cold tatling of Estates, but
haste to the Coach; have you brought one


I, and four Horses, that will hurry us to London; and a Levite that will do
the business: we shall be there by five a Clock


I, but we shall not get into the Church so soon.


The Sexton has provided a Bottle of Wine, and some other things, for your
diversion, till seven a Clock, at which time you will be mist here, and the
work will be doing there


Let Us away to the Coach then. Betty, it is something lighter now, you may
easily find the way back; and be sure you remember your instructions, you know
where to send to me; so fare thee well, good Girl


I vow, Madam, I must weep at parting, though you are going about to do that
business I have always wished you; but assure your Ladyships, I Will serve you
both to the utmost of my power; and so the god of Love preserve and prosper
your proceedings


Friend. Pretty Mrs. Betty, your Servants.


I charge you, Neighbor Mold, make a Confession before Mr. Clowt, the Kings
Constable, of what you told me last Night, as you and I sat in the Chimney
Corner at my House, drinking a dram or two of Brandy; by the same token, you
took the Bottle out of my hand, whilst I did something; but that is no matter


Neighbor Mold, discharge the part of a good Christian, and clear your
Conscience, by making your Confession to a Constable of the Kings; who is a
Member of State. Indeed you may object, though I am one of the Kings
Constables, you are one of his Sextons too; true, it is so; and that is in part
satisfaction: for it is unnatural for one Member to persecute another: so, if
the business were only 'twixt you and I, 'twere easily made up. But here is my
Neighbor Fells, truly, a Woman that understands the World, has been wickedly
dealt with, has a great deal of Money due to her, and much linen worn out; has
lain long in wait for one of the Men, that she says, nay, she swears,
Neighbor Mold, you told her was to come to your House this Morning, from
thence to go to Church to be Married. Therefore I command you in the Kings Name
to speak the truth


Or else I Will have a Petition, to have you before Justice Frump.


How, a Petition, Gammer Fells? you have forgot all your Law, as if you had
never had any. A Suppina, Woman, a Suppina; that is the only way. A Petition? I
cannot forbear laughing; I tell you, you cannot do it any other way, but by a
Suppina. Ha, Gammer Fells, you have not so good a Headpiece as you had
formerly. Well, well; Age, Age


Now, my dear Mistress, we are safe from all our fears; this is the Sexton's
House, there we will repose a little, then to Church


Are you come, in faith, Sir; Seize on him, Mr. Constable, in the Kings Name;
this is the other Rogue, that owed me Money, and forswore himself. Come, bring
them all away: for, Mr. Clowt, if one body in a Company be perjured, all the
rest are guilty, and must stand in the Pillory with him


Gammer Fells, it is very true, you're in the right in that case; so I command
you all, in the Kings Name, to come away with me


Mistress, if any body here owes you any thing, I Will pay you presently five
times as much, if that will be any satisfaction; pray, put us to no trouble,
for wee're about earnest business


You say honestly, Sir; pray be as good as your word, and let me have but
thirty shillings, and I Will discharge you; for I love a Gentleman, as I do my
life


Here Is your Money; so fare you well.


Hold, Sir, hold; how shall I be discharged by the King for the perjury? You
must go fore Justice Frump, and stand the Trial


Why, who in the Company is perjured? Pray, Mr. Constable, ben't so
impertinent, but let us go about our business


Why, that is that Gentleman; and you being in his Company, are, with all the
rest, equally concerned. So I command you come away, in the Kings Name


That Is true indeed, the perjury is not discharged; bring them away, there is no
remedy; I would it were in my power to do you any good: Come, Neighbor Clowt,
bring 'em along; I Am afraid you will lie by it


I Will not go along with you, not shall any of the Company. This Old Bawd has
cozened me of some Money, and I believe you intend to cheat me of more


Offer to draw, I Will knock down your Wench here; will you come on quietly, in
the Kings Name


Mr. Constable, here is five pounds, let us but pass now; and we will promise to
meet you to Morrow Morning


I wish he would, in faith; if he takes it, I shall tell Justice Frump, and see
how he will take it; perhaps he will cheat the King too. Come, come, Mr. Clowt, the
Law lies not in your Hands; if I live, I Will see 'em laid up; and if you don't
look to your Office, look to your self; shall People be perjured, and go
unpunished


Why, good Woman, what are you concerned? your debt is satisfied.


Is it so, Goody Gillyflurt, with your face full of patches? you shall know
that I am not satisfied; it is such as you make poor Men they cannot pay their
Debts: where have they picked up you and that Puppet, your Companion? I Will have
you where you shall give an account of your selves, and what business you have
with these Men


You abominable old Bawd, I Will kick you, till you curse your own Blaspheming
tongue


How? Do you kick an Ancient Housekeeper before the face of me the Kings
Constable? Sir, I would have you to know, you have forfeited your foot by the
Laws of the Land, therefore look to it. Neighbor Mold, I command you in the
Kings Name to assist me; have a good heart, Gammer Fells, I Will see you
satisfied. Come on, Sir


Ned, wee're utterly undone if we go before the Justice, for he will be sure to
commit us, right, or wrong, if it be but to get his Man Money for the Mittimus;
of which he himself has the largest shate


I don't know what to do. Mr. Constable, will nothing satisfy you, unless we
go before the Justice; you would do us a favor, if you would take our words
till to Morrow; and hark you, Sir, here is five pounds to buy your Wife a Ring


I protest, Sir, I would do it, though you had killed my Father, for so much
Money; but Gammer Fells will have a fling at my Plumb-Tree, and utterly undo
me, therefore I cannot do it: Pray, Sir, come along


Pray, Mr. Constable, will you allow the Ladies liberty to go to a Friends
House, whilst we go to the Justice's


The Ladies, with a Murrain; no, Sir, they shall go with you, and see how they
like lying in a Gaol. Captain Clowt, come along, I Will lead the way, therefore
look to the Prisoners


Well, there is no remedy; Ladies, don't be dejected though; Justice must
discharge us


I do'nt care if the deed be done before my Uncle hears of it. You may go; Mr.
Constable, we will follow you


Mr. Constable, if you design our March much further, pray let us have a Coach,
for the Ladies are not used to foot it so far


This is the House, Sir; pray be patient, I Will have you no further.


Good Morrow, Mr. Clowt; I suppose, by the people you have brought with you,
your business is to my Master; I Will step in, and call him; Mr. Clowt, in the
mean time, pray be careful of the Prisoners


What peaking Puppy's this, that looks as if he quartered with a Camelion, and
eat nothing but Air


By this light, he looks like one that was got by a Beggar, and has lived ever
since lousy. But who is this that looks so like a Knight Templar, with his
Chopps muffled


Stingey, the Speech I have been getting by heart these ten days will now do
me a kindness to this Company; therefore do you hold the Paper, whilst I speak;
if I chance to be out, you may put me in with a whisper, and pretend business;
for it is excellent good, and well penned by a Counsel learned in the Law; and
now I Will begin. Hum, ha. Gentlemen, I know not what you are, nor from whence
you come; you may be this, or you may be that. But for this or that, it is no
matter


How, an't like your Worship, no matter? your Worship shall know that the
matter is considerable, both to the King, and to your self, for all these
People are perjured; and you know by that there is many a penny coming in. And
they came from Hackney, and these Wenches belong to Mr. Pett, of the same Town;
and I have sent him word of it, and he will be here presently, I presume, under
favor of your good Worship


Woman, hold your prating, or I protest, I Will set you into the Stocks; would
her tongue were out, she has put me quite besides my Speech; where abouts was
I, Stingey


Why, you were at, But for this, or that, it is no matter.


Then, Gentlemen, But for this, or that, it is no matter; as I was saying
before. You know the time of a Justice of Peace is precious, an Ancient Author
says, concerning the life and living of Justices; who says, their labor is
much, and their care great: therefore I command you, Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen, that you do not weary me with long Circumstances, to unsettle my
head, but I pray be satisfied, and submit to Justice; for your offenses are of
a fearful -- What Is next, Stingey


Consequence.


Of a fearful Consequence; and indeed, most crying Crimes, as the learned
Felton says, Libera nos Domine. But let him say what he will, he was a
Justice; I am one, and have in this House the Kings Commission that made me so


I believe your Worship's a little mistaken; sure, Sir, Mr. Felton was a
Parson, and not a Justice


Come, come, let me tell you, there is no difference between 'em, learn that
from me. You're a Young Man, and have not seen so much of the World as some
have. But, as I was saying before, I am a Justice, and have the Kings
Commission for it


Justice Frump, your Servant; I Am glad to see you, Sir, and have made haste to
do it. Gentlemen, you have done kindly by me, I Am beholding to you; so is my
Son Leftwell here. For your parts, Gentlewomen, you shall along with me again.
Good Woman, come and Dine with me on Sunday, I Will give you satisfaction for
your care. Hereafter I shall watch you both a little better


You are an honest Gentleman, Sir, and I Will be sure to come according to my
promise; I Am glad that it came into my heart to hinder these sweet pretty
Gentlewomens marriage with these beggarly Fellows


Beggarly enough a Conscience, good Woman; they were not so well clad as Adam
in Paradise, before I lent 'em Money to make 'em Clothes; no, not so much as
Figg-leaves, Gammer Fells: and these wretched Rascals, to reward me, come
betimes in the Morning, and run away with my Mistress, just when I should have
married her; no Devils would have done so


O wicked Knaves; I warrant you, Sir, Justice Frump will give them their Reward
for it; to go to cheat such a pretty, sweetfac'd, likely, hopeful, young
Gentleman as you are


Mr. Justice, your Servant. Daughter, and Neice, you have deceived me once; but
if ever you put such a trick upon me again, I Will forgive you


Mr. Pett, I should be glad, if the Law would give me leave, to let your
Relations go; but they are equally concerned with these Gentlemen, and must go
with them to New Prison: it is pity, because they are pretty Maids; but Justice
must not be stifled


Gammer Fells, we will give you ten shillings, if you will say you mistook the
Man; and that this is not he: you will get nothing by keeping of us, nor will
Mr. Pett know how to get off his Daughter and Cousin; so you will lose your
reward there too


In Faith I Will do it, for I love a Gentleman as I do my life.


Sir, I Will be bound to save you harmless; and I Will stay at my London House this
Month, where you may send for me at any time: and here is ten shillings for
your Clerk


There is five for me.


Sir, your Worship, I protest, I mistook the Man, this is none of him, I
thought it was; and unless you set them all free, I Am undone; they will sue me,
they say, till I have not a groat left to help my self: Good, your Worship,
consider a poor Woman


Gammer Fells, if you say so, I must discharge them; provided, they gratify my
Clerk, which is a thing common


O, Sir, most willingly; there is ten shillings for him.


Well, Mr. Justice, if they are discharged, I hope these are so too. Fare you
well. Gentlemen, pray let me see you no more near my House


By my Sword, if I see you near the House again, I Will kick you both upon the
place I first meet you, though it be a thousand Miles off. So good b'uy, honest
Friends, good b'uy


That this blund'ring Fellow should tell the Sexton our names, and the names of
the Ladies, and the place from whence they came


There was no other way in the World, to bring all out, and utterly ruin us;
we are utterly undone, Ned; and I do believe it is impossible ever to bring it
about again. Here comes the Coxcomb


What a pox is your meaning? Always playing the Fool thus, to send me to get a
Parson, and provide every thing, and then never come: Indeed it is like you; I
kept my Levite in the Church from four a Clock in the Morning, till 'twas nine,
that he swore he was almost starved


You have done us good Service; if you had your reward, your ears ought to be
cut, for the mighty care you took in our concerns; Indeed, you should have
satisfaction


Indeed, Thomas, you have undergone a great deal, and done more by half then we
could have desired you. If the Devil himself had given you directions, you
could not possibly have made us so miserable


Pray tell us seriously, what have we done to you, that should provoke you to
ruin us in this damnable manner? Is it your custom, pray, to betray your
Friends in the drinking two Pots of Ale? Lord, Sir, how you look about you, as
if you had lost your way in a Wilderness. I Will warrant you don't know what you
have done, now


Not he, I Will warrant, 'twas done in his sleep; does he not use to walk,
Franck; you have lain with him? By this light, I take him to be so honesty that
he would not do such a thing waking. Were not asleep, Tom, when thou told'st
all


Gentlemen, you have been very free, both in your Examinations, and your
Accusations, and yet I have said nothing; pray will you give me leave to speak


I; pray, what would you say?


Why, I say, I Will be hanged if this be any thing but a design to stop my mouth,
and keep me from quarrelling with you, about the abuse you put upon me, to make
me stay in the Church starving in the cold with a great greasy Parson


No, no, Thomas, you are monstrously mistaken; for if that were all, you know
we are well enough able to deal with you; we can soon knock you down with words.
But pray let me ask you one thing: How many Pots of mild Beer did you and Mr.
Mold drink before you came to the matter; I mean, before you made the discovery
of my Name, and Franck Friendly's, and both the Ladies, and from whence they
came


And pray let us know why you did it, and what you got by doing of it; and
whether the Devil be yet out of you, that was in you when you went about it;
pray be pleased to speak: what, are you tongue-ty'd? Don't gape, but speak, Man


Well, and what hurt did this do you?


It has only ruined us, that is all. But why the Devil should you make a
confident of an old sottish Fellow, that is not satisfied with cheating the
living, but dead too; sure you might have done your business without giving him
a particular of our Names


Pray, Gentlemen, how has this undone you, let me but know the meaning on it?


Why, the Sexton overjoyed with the Money you had given him, and happy that he
had news to carry to his Neighbors, went strait to Mother Fells (living hard
by) and being drunk with her, told her I was one of the Persons concerned; she
strait gets a Warrant, and stays at the Sextons, takes him and me, and both
the Ladies; sends home word to old Pett, who, whilst we were at your Justices,
fetches them both away. Now, you have heard your Crime to the full, pray what
have you (with a pox) to say for your self


Faith, Tom, I don't know what satisfaction you can give us; unless you will
consent that we should cut your throat


I, for Heaven's sake do it quickly; I acknowledge I deserve it, pray dispatch,
I hate to live one minute after I have been so great a Brute, to betray my
Friend by folly; I was cursed


Prithee Coxcomb, leave raving, and let us see what may be done to bring all
about again; for being sure of the Ladies, our case is not yet desperate, they
are now at their London House; the Scene lies something nearer then it did


To make you some part of satisfaction, I Will go and kill Leftwell.


Now he talks of killing Leftwell, I Have a design in my head, may hap to do us
good


Prithee, what is it?


Why, Faithful shall send Leftwell a Challenge, and in it, unless he meet,
threaten to Pistol him, and write to me to be his Second; and then -- hark --
what do think of this, boy


Faith, Ned, I think -- Pray, Sir, be quiet, we will not have a thought of yours
in the business. Ned, this would do rarely, if we could find a way to let the
Ladies know on it; how must that be done


Why, I Will tell you how.


Prithee, good muddy brains, if thou would hold thy prating, and say, nor do
any more than you have directions from us, things may be carried on well enough


If a Man commits but one fault in his life, he shall be sure to hear o'nt;
pray, proceed then, and let it be purely your own, and be pox'd


How shall they know our intentions?


Why, I expect Runwell every minute, who will not fail to do it dexterously.


See where he comes.


The poor Ladies, Sir, are utterly undone if you can find no way to relieve
them; Madam Leticia is to morrow Morning to be Married to this Looby Leftwell


Runwell, come in with me, I Will send a Letter to her of one design more, which
I hope will take; Thomas, pray provide us one Parson more presently


I Will warrant you; if I don't, let me dye for it.


But have a care of Carousing again with the Sexton. Ned, you and I Will go write
the Challenge, and the Letter; for the Pincipal has forgot to read; but
however, I Am sure he cannot write


My last fault makes me at present a little liable to the lash of your ugly
tongue; but I Will let you alone till the business is done, and then have at you

So god b'uy, I Will go find out my Doctor.


Pray do.


Was ever such an unhappy Accident as we have met withal, to ruin our
intention: If there be a god of Love, he has very little kindness for us; dear
Cousin, what shall we do


pretend thy self sick, and so avoid it; I protest, were it my case (as it is
thine) I would rather dye, than have Leftwell, he looks so like a
Horse-courser. For my part, I Am resolved to have Mr. Friendly at one time or
other, though he owed all the Ale-wives in Town Money


Thou talk, Cousin. But prithee (if thou can) tell me a serious way.


Why then, I Will tell you; when the Parson asks, whether you will have him, say
no; then I Am sure nothing can be done: what think thou of that, Betty


I vow, Madam, I think you direct very well. Pray, Mistress, take her advice.


Madam, my Master sends his Service, and this Letter; from Mr. Friendly this to
your Ladyship

Dear Mistress, pity a poor Lover, that lives yet only in hopes that you will
make him happy. Pray look upon me; faith, I shall be lost else


Good Lover, let your Master be served before you. Pray, Madam, what says Mr.
Lovewell


Betty, I hope that this device of theirs will make us happy. Runwell, go back,
and tell them we will observe their directions


For my part, if I fail in any thing, let me -- Here Is my Uncle, and the
Wise-Acre


What Paper was that you put into your pocket?


Only my Tailors Bill for my last Gown, Sir.


Prithee, Love, let me look on it; for by that I shall know what you will stand me
in


Pray, Sir, forbear; when you come to pay for what I wear, you shall have leave
to look; till then, you have no Authority, nor shall have over me


I Will fetch you down in your Wedding shoes, in faith, for this; to Morrow night
you shall give me twenty kisses to come to Bed to you, or the Devil take me if
I do it; and you are a saucy --


Son, Son, you're too passionate; let her have her humor, for once, and keep
her Paper


Sir, here is a Letter was left just now for Mr. Leftwell.


Let me see it.


This is the Challenge; see how his color turns, Cousin.


Indeed, he looks pale.


Oh, I Am undone, I Am undone: I would your Daughter had been drowned ten times
her depth, before I saw her; I Am undone, I Will have none of her; I Will not be
killed for any Woman in England, not I; look here, do but look here; this is
from one of the gang of those Rogues that ran away with her this Morning: I
don't like her so well, as to lose my life for her; and these cursed Rogues
will never leave till they have killed me; undone, undone


Pray, Mr. Leftwell, take comfort, don't snob so, and be satisfied; you are
safe enough in the House


No, Mrs. Fickle, but I an't safe in the House; the Rogue may bring a Cannon,
that may carry quite through the House for ought I know, and kill me, so as no
body shall know where to find a piece of me afterward, to tell who hurt me;
would I were a thousand Miles off. O good Ladies, speak a good word for me, let
me have some comfort from you quickly, I shall faint else


I Protest, it is a bloody design. Daughter, I Will read it to you.


O dear, Sir, if you read, I Am a dead Man; I cannot endure to hear my own
Sentence; pray, put it into your Pocket, for I protest to you with tears, and
upon my knees, that I am ready to swound at the sight of it. Sweet Sir, let me
see it no more, if you desire I should live


Prithee Son be satisfied, I warrant I Will keep thee safe in the House from any
harm; nothing shall hurt you here


I tremble as I stand, I protest, for fear I should be blown up; I Will be
hanged, if he has not put Gunpowder into the Cellar


Do you think so; indeed, Mr, Leftwell, it will please me mightily, to dye in
so good Company as you are; for if the House be blown up, we shall all go
together


I don't know how it may please you, but I protest, I cannot endure to think
on it; I had rather see you, and a hundred more such, blown up together, than be
a party concerned. O that ever I set my eyes on that Woman: now must I dye for
going about to do you a Courtesy


Truly, Sir, I Am sorry you're like to suffer thus for me; I had rather, I
assure you, not have you, than you should be injured


You are a couple of dissembling Sluts; I Will warrant you'de be glad to see me
hanged, to have me afterward


Sir, there is one Mr. Lovewell at door, very earnest to speak with you.


O, then I Am a dead Man, he is come to kill me. Pray good Ladies, pity a poor
Man, and stand before me; if I escape killing this time, I Will never go about to
Marry more


I am ashamed to see you such a Coward; a Man, and cry? I Will send for him in,
and know his business; if I find him concerned, I Will have him secured. Pray,
Son, satisfy your self


Secure him! that will do me a mighty kindness indeed, his being secured after
he has killed me. Before he comes in, let your Servants feel in his pockets for
pocket Pistols, and Daggers, and seize upon his Sword


That Is not much amiss, it shall be so: Go tell him, if he will suffer that, he
may come in; else he may ee'ne walk back again


Sir, I wonder what he should come for; I don't care for the sight of him,
since he seduced me last away, and brought me into your displeasure


We shall see presently.


Your Servant, Sir; I have suffered a very severe search; before I could obtain
admittance. I must confess you have some reason to think ill of me; but now,
Sir, I am sensible how much I had like to have injured you, and that deserving
Gentleman


Oh, he points at me; Mercy, Mercy: dear Mr. Lovewell, let me but live one
Three or Fourscore years longer, and then you shall find me very willing to lay
down my life at your Service. O, let me not be cut off in my prime, before I
have received half a years Rent of my Estate


Why, what do thou mean? pray be pacified; he has no design against you I
dare swear


Dear Father, stand before me though; for say what you will, I Am afraid to
trust him


Pray, Mr. Lovewell, if you have any business, proceed.


Sir, I thought my self, in point of Honor, bound to discover this bloody
design laid to destroy your intended Son-in-Law. Look upon this Letter, Sir


I protest, Sir, I think my self much engaged to you, if we could by your means
apprehend him. My Son-in-Law has already received the Challenge; and it seems,
he has chose you for his Second


Sir, that is the thing I came about; if you will get a Warrant for him
presently, you will find both him and me together, at the Sign of the Lamb,
within two doors of Justice Frump's; I Will go before, and get him ready


Now, truly, Mr. Lovewell, we both esteem our selves much beholden to you, and
will endeavor to make you amends


All I desire, is, pardon for my last error. Your Servant, Sir; Ladies, your
Servant


I Am glad he is gone; for he has frighted me out of the small sense I had.


Son, will you go along with me to apprehend him?


No, Sir; I thank you for that, In Faith; I Will as soon thrust my Head into a hot
Oven, as venture my Nose an Inch without the Door, for one of these Dogs to
snap at


Well, then; I Will take my Servants, and do it without you.


My Father's gone; I wish they were here now.


What shall we do with this Fool Leftwell? he will run after my Master, and fetch
him back again, when he sees us going: look where he comes sneaking, like a
Prentice Leftwell? Are you resolved to be Married to Morrow


No, I Am resolved to see whether I shall live, or dye, first, by your favor.


Faith, Mr. Leftwell, I Am afraid, now my Uncle's gone, they are come to kill
you; these people knock with fury: hark, they knock again. Look out at the
Window, Betty, and bring us word who it is, before you let 'em in


I Will run, Madam.


O, Mrs. Fickle, if I have any heart, it is just now in my Mouth. For I feel a
soft thing tumbling between my tongue and my teeth


O me, Mr. Leftwell, it is Mr. Friendly, and Mr. Lovewell; what will you do?


Dear Betty, put me into any place to preserve me. O, quickly, they will get in
else, before I can hide my self


Come along with me, I Will lock you into the Larder; come, come.


Betty, I protest, if thou sav'st me this time, I Will have thee, and let thy
Mistress alone


He Is safe enough.


I Have locked up the logger-head, now I Will let them in.


Do, Betty. Cousin, put on your Scarf, and fit your self for the March; delays
are dangerous


I am ready, my dear Girl; give me thy hand. I vow, I can but think, how
simply we shall look, when we come to night to lie with our Lovers


Thou art the maddest Wench that e're wore Petticoat: how should we look, think
you


My dear Leticia; your generous love has laid so many obligations on me, that
nothing but the Service of an Age can seem a Tithe of satisfaction. Which to be
paid --


Pray, Sir, forbear your Complements at present, and let us make haste to carry
on the work we come about


Bravely proposed, my pretty Mistress; if they lie lingering longer, we will
away, and laugh at them. What do thou mean, Ned? to be (at this hasty time)
telling thy Mistress, in blanck verse, that which she has been satisfied in
these six Months; how much you love her, and how much she is more than you
deserve; why, she knows both the one, and the other


Sir, their advice at this time is not much amiss; therefore let us make haste.


Betty, is the Coast clear?


There Is none but the Old Chare-Woman in the House; and she is asleep in the
Chimney Corner


I believe Mr. Leftwell will make a foul Larder; shall we leave him under lock
and key


Hang him, I Will leave the Key in the door, that the next that comes may let him
out


Mr. Justice, it is intolerable; a Man must stand an hour, or two, hearing you
talk Nonsense, instead of Law, to delay the time, when a Person comes to you
in haste, upon so great an occasion as this is, a matter of life and death


Stingey, make him a Warrant; but, Sir, a Warrant that is made upon life and
death by a Justice of Peace cannot be had for less than a Crown; if you will be
at the price of it, my Man will make it you. Sir, it is nothing to me, the Money
comes into his Pocket; I protest, I don't desire a farthing of you, not I


Sir, I don't value a Crown, as worth a thought; but I have been a Justice my
self, and never heard of such a thing as this


I grant you, Sir, not by a Justice of London, but always by a Justice of
Peace of Middlesen. My Man, Sir, knows the Law, as well as most do; and he
shall swear it, if you desire to hear him


He will not, sure. I Will give him ten shillings for the Warrant, if he will.


Pray, Sir, give me the Book.


Hold, Sir, here is a Crown for your Warrant; I would not for a World be so
instrumental in thy destruction. God b'ye, Sir; I believe you have kept me so
long, I have lost my opportunity


Pay me for my part, Stingey; I ought to have six pence more than you; for
indeed, there is no such price upon any Warrant


That I know, therefore I offered to swear it, whereas you only told him so;
that the Gentleman might be satisfied


Give me half a Crown then; and take your Hat, and fetch a quart of Ale for
your Mistress out of your Money


What, hoe! Daughter, Niece, Betty! where are these Girls? What, would they
offer to go out, and leave the House empty? Go some of you, and see if you can
find them. This idle Justice keeping me so long, has made me miss him; but I
suppose, Mr. Lovewell will at Night inform me where I may have them. What, have
you found them


No, Sir; nor any body, but the old Woman asleep in the Kitchen Chimney.


What should become of them, and Mr. Leftwell? There can be no trick put upon
me, forsure they are all together


within. I Am here, Sir; is the House clear? Is there no danger?


Prithee, where art, Man?


I am here in some place, I don't know what you call it; but it is where the
cold Meat, and the Kitchin-stuff stands


What, are you locked in the Larder?


I, Sir, the Larder; Betty locked me in two hours ago; I thank her, she saved my
life by it; but now I hope you will let me ou


Moses, unlock the door.


O, Father, we have been in such a fright since you went; you were no sooner
gone, but comes Ned Lovewell, and Franck Friendly, with a full Resolution to
kill me, but Betty saved my life. I heard them carry away your Cousin and your
Daughter; whom, I believe verily they will kill for my sake; and that will be a
sad thing: but better them, than I


This was a trick, a design; I find it now too late.


Sir, I was sending after you; it is well you have brought my Family home again.

With all Humility we beg your Blessing, as your Son and Daughter.


Ned Lovewell, In Faith, I Am glad thou have got her; now you will let me live at
quiet, I hope, and I Will forgive you all the Money I lent you. I Will ee'ne strike
in with Betty


What, have you got my Daughter there? If you have an Estate to keep her, it is
well; you shall have none of me: therefore get you out of my sight


Sir, your Sentence is very severe; will you please but to hear me.


No, Sir, I have heard and seen too much of you already; but there is your way
out, and you may take your Lady with you, for she shall never come here again


Pray, Mr. Lovewell, before you go, will you hear me; my Uncle cannot hinder me
of my Fortune, part of which is at your Service


No, Gossip, it shall never be said, that my Daughter was beholden to you for
her maintenance. Mr. Lovewell, I know you're a Gentleman, and I find you're
Ingenious; but as you have no Estate, if I could have hindered it, you should
not have Married her; but I will be satisfied, since I see it is decreed: I am
imform'd too, you have behaved your self handsomely, and honestly, and in that
believe my Daughter not quite cast away. My Blessing be upon you both; and I Am
apt to believe you will use her well, which I doubt whether Leftwell would have
done. Cousin, I wish you joy; your Portion shall be paid you when you please;
and if you learn to be thrifty, you may be happy


May Heaven, Sir, reward your kindness with continual joy; and may I live no
longer than that day when I forget to pay you most obedient Service


Sir, I hope in a little time to let you see the Fruits of our labor, and am
resolved to make you a great Uncle, as soon as my Friend Lovewell shall a
Grand-sire


O, Sir, these liberal promisers are always short pay-masters.


How do you intend to dispose of your self Mr. Leftwell, after your great
fright


Why, I desire you'de give me leave to Marry your Maid; a Man may have her
without danger of being Murdered, and I have always had a mind to her


Betty, come hither, give me your hand, I Will make the Match; it shall be done
to Morrow Morning


Now my Mistress is provided for, I begin to love my self so well, that I
cannot find in my heart to refuse a good Fortune, though it come by a Fool;
whom I believe I can baste into submission


Sir, it shall be as you command.

I Am not a whit sorry I have lost my Mistress, since I see she is better
provided; neither will I despair of making my Fortune by her favor, out of
this Ass


Gentlemen, and Ladies, your Servant; hearing that all things and parties are
agreed, I Have brought some Friends of mine that resolve to give you a Song and a
Dance


Honest Tom, it is kindly done; and they will, I believe, be very acceptable to
all the good Company; but we will Dance our selves, if your Friends, as you call
them, will but strike up. I wish thou had a Mistress too, to make thy
happiness equal ours


Mine wants but little on it; for I Am resolved to live as well as you: now you
two are rich, I Will never be poor


Thou art ours for ever, Tom.


But he should keep his Hands clean, then.


What, will not Marriage tame you? Still abusive? I must stop your Mouths with
Music


All excellent good, in faith; very good indeed: pray, Son, and Nephew, walk in,
and lead your Wives to Supper, for it grows near that time; for Betty's sake,
you shall be welcome too, Mr. Leftwell


Nay, I care not for whose sake it is; so I have but enough, I shall be very
well satisfied. Come, Sweeting


If we had been unhappy in the loss of our Mistresses now, I should have grown
almost out of love with Honesty


O, there is nothing like it.
Let all that would do ill be ruled by me;
For by this President you plainly see
Fate still reserves rewards for Honesty.

NOw, Gallants, your result; we fain would know
Whether you Judge it fit to live, or no:
This truth we will say, to mitigate its Crime,
It is his first; made in a fortnight's time.
A Critic, for that Reason, ought to give,
If not a Pardon, surely, a Reprieve.
'Twould be high Tyranny for to inveigh,
In cruel terms, against an Infant Play.
But if your Laws all mercy do deny;
He Is sure to have relief in equity:
He appeals thither, as his proper Sphere,
Nor can he be compelled to appear
In any other Court; but could he by persuasions draw
You to be kind in equity and Law;
And see it signed with all your hands, he will be,
Though now but weak, yours in Maturity.

