MAss! thou have got a luckie hand Brazutus,
The Septicollis now of Rome is levelled,
My way made even to St. Peter's chair,
The Popedom mine!

God bless your Holiness!
Never had men quicker dispatch to Heaven,
(I Judge Sir) that those seven your predecessors,
Thanks to my luckey stars, and pills! (then which
There can be nothing more Infallible)
(Your Holiness excepted)

Here Is my hand.

Your Toe, good Sir, your Toe's too great a honor.

Murder as many as thou can, Brazutus,
(Husband it likewise to thy best advantage,
I know men's Deaths must be thy Livelihood)
You freely have my Dispensation for it.

All thanks, Sir,
My study shall be to deserve it.

Hark.
They come, I must retire.

God save the Pope!

Peter the Apostle chooses Hildebrand!

Master! the Kettle-drumms past by just now.

Peace fool, those were religious men, called Friars.

Men! shave they for the scabb? or were half poisoned?
Pox on the bungler! could his feeble dosse,
But fetch the hair off?

No Jests now, Jocoso.
Hasten home, I am with you straight; but first
Will fetch my Patent, to prepare for travel:
I cannot think it safe, abiding here,
So near the Pope, should once his Magic prompt
Him to believe, some liberal bribes might tempt
Me to ridd him hence (by one slight or other)
(To make all sure) he would send me packing first.
For all his fair pretenses I confess,
I dare not too much trust his Holiness.

How can the Emperor take this Prudentio:

Pride and Ambition ruins all the world.
Truth, Sir, I fear 'twill breed bad blood, if not
Timely made up; He Is a Prince wise and valiant,
And wont be balked thus of his ancient right.

Hildebrand reckons all the Roman Empire,
May I not say the the whole fourth Monarchy?
For Peter's Patrimony, falling now,
To him, whereof he will be sole, supreme;
Making the Scepter level to his Mitre.

Must none arrive to heaven without his leave,
Nor yet possess the earth in any quiet?
Would he be Metropolitan of both?
I must confess, to men in Sacred Orders,
We owe all love, awful respect and honor;
Yet there are two extremes do ill become
Their cloth Honorio, Pride and Poverty:
I Would neither have them swell, nor starve to death.

Here comes mad Junio.

God save you, Sir!

Yours Prudentio, Honorio I am yours!

Junio, sweet Junio! prithee lad, what news?

Faith, that which makes me laugh, Sir, The new Pope
(Talking against Massing-Preists Wives already:)
Has wrought the prettiest different effect:
Some storm, and some are glad on it: The one swears
(Should he nere use bead more) he will never quit
His pretty Bet^y for an Ave Marie.
^h' other complains, Nets Lectures spoil his Sermons.

Mad Junio still.

Troth, I am serious, Sir.

Prithee speak

I am, and can tell you further,
The Archbishops Grace of Mentz, the other day,
Pressing this Order, from his Holiness,
Narrowly escaped his life.

What project's this?
I warrant you Prudentio, Some cunning
Citizen Miser (to preserve his purse)
(Fearing least his Impropriated Priest
Might Marry, and so leave a parish charge)
Has put it in his head.

With this persuasion.
Most Beneficed men dying Batchelours,
Would make him Heir, and so enrich his See.

I had almost forgot to tell you too:
Those who contrive the thriftiest way to live,
Think Wives, will be as cheap as Concubines.
Cardinal Cremensis the other day,
(Arguing fiercely 'ganst Priests-Matrimonie)
Was caught that night bedding a common strumpet.

I fear this design will but promote
Lusts more, and secret Murders to conceal 'um.
Restraint often creates those unruly passions,
Which Freedom, slights.

But Gentlemen! before
We part let us clash one pint of Wine together,
I Will give you that shall be most excellent.

All thanks kind Junio. Ho. We'll accept your proffer.

With all my heart; now I could hugg you dearly.
Let times go how they will, the Grape-juyce merits
My praises still, for that preserves my spirits.

Poetical!

Whether or no, you know it:
The very thoughts of Sack will make a Poet.

Ha. ha. ha.

It cannot be born! Princes are things too holy
For Popes to ^oole: Has kind fate blessed me with
Such conquest over the Saxons, and will this
Religious Rebel, now spoil all at home?
To make a Pope without me, is all one
As to unmake me.

Sir, I thought that past
The reach of mortals, dare they snarch that Crown off,
Which none, but a Divine hand settled on you?

They had as good seek to unravel Heaven,
And fetch the Diety thence.

My Sons talk,
As if descended, from Imperial Loins;
But what wont human Impudence attempt,
Spurred with ambition?
What means this haste?

Hildebrand's Nuntio, is arrived, Sir, And --

And what, Sends for my Scepter does he not?
May I nere more ask pardon of my sins!
If this steel does not make him cry me mercy.

And so he does, Sir, may it please your Highness!

He shall know that there was a Caesar long
Before St. Peter, or his Successor
Were ever thought on. Otho. May it please your Highness!

The Election of the Pope from Constantine
Descended to Me, Otho, Reckon that.

It Is now Seven Hundred years agon, and upwards.

Nor shall this ^ome-Usurper stand a day,
Can I but once reach Italy.

Please you --
Sir, Hear me, Hildebrand is sorry.

How?

For that he cannot, Sir, play Prester John.
Be Prince and Prelate too.

Grant he were so,
Could it be thought these twins of government,
Might ever wrangle in the self-same breast
For the Supremacy; It would be found,
(I lay my life on it) that St. Peter's Chair
Must owe it self upheld by Caesar's Throne.

Sir, --

No Bull like the roaring Cannon, No
Anathama like a good Sword and Pistol.

I see I am still disturbed.

Go on, Otho.

For ought we hear, Sir, Hildibrand is sorry,
The lawless rout of common people should
Cry him up Pope: which Title he protests
He never will own, Sir, without your Election.

I hate this flattering.

It takes too much.

Till when he has refused Inauguration.

Now thou say somewhat.

For this very purpose,
Comes th'Embassie.

This is some satisfaction.
Receive 'um, we will give 'um some Audience.

Were it not fit Hildebrand should have made
Most Royal, Sir, a Personal submission?

Proxy humility seems but presumption.

I see Youth's rash and inconsiderate,
It was the giddie factious multitude,
Not he (my Boys) intruded on my right.

Con. Sir, we submit.

Haste then without delay,
To grace the Entertainment.

We obey.

And is the Emperors promise come to this?
Is this his Liberty?

A Princes word
I took to be, as true as Heaven it self.

For this I Will n'ere believe a Conquest more,
But what shall meet me over ears in blood.

'Twas not we feared death as to be thought
Foolishly lavish of our lives: to fight
For that liberty, we might have with peace.

Would we had dyed before we yielded.

Hark! They sing and dring within.

Here Is to that Noble Soul;
Drowns his sins in a Bowl;
And cares not a fig for the Pope.
Here Is to him a full Glasss,
That counts him an Ass,
Who will stinch at the sight of the Rope.
Ho Boys!

A merry life and a short.

About with it.

Where lies the fault?

Roger it is your liquor.

O plague, I drank the very last but one,
Ralph wants it.

O Brave Roarers! They know no other prayers.
These are their Mattins, and their Evening Songs.

Is there such mirth in death?

Or are they rather
Glad that the friendly Halter shortly will
Free them from Goal, which I count worse then death.
What man that has that Noble thing called Soul
But hates confinement? This whole world would be
To narrow for him, were he always tied to'r.

But these poor souls are hardened in their Irons.

I was in hopes that breach like to have bin
Betwixt the Emperor and the Pope of late,
Would have made our way out

But that is all dash't.

Could not our old friend ( Otho having got
Into such favor) do us here a kindness?

We are but here kept like West-Indian captives,
To be devoured at some solemn meeting,
With Mirth and Jollitie; endure't who list
Let our wits work our freedom

We Will all assist.

May not one guess affection by a glance?

Madam!

'Twas but one look, and that look did it.
Those lights like Archimedes burning-glasse
Set me on Fire at that distance from him.

Your meaning, Madam.

Sylvia, thou art dull,
I see, for had thou any sense at all,
How could thou choose but feel the self-same heat?

Explain your self, pray Madam.

Then I will.
I Am conquered by my Fathers Captive.

Which?

Now I could chide thee for a silly Gitle:
Do ask me which?

Otho's fair, Frederick smiling.

I see my error. Love is such a madness;
What we love, we'd have all love; and yet cannot
Endure a Rival: Did not mind him Sylvia
With the Majestic countenance? My love
Is not Effeminate, although a Woman's.

Bold Magnus!

Magnus!

In your cheeks I read it,
That blush betraies you; He is --

Hush the Empress.

Aurelia! Why were you wanting at
The sport but now?

Madam I was just coming.

'Twas excellent, I love to see men active.

They Are gone to visit now the Saxon Captives,
Nothing that is tending to your Fathers glory,
Must be concealed from these noble strangers.

Must Magnus make them sport?

Pray Madam!

What says Aurelia? What Is that Sylvia?

She Is sorry, Madam, she should loose the sport.

I thought 'twould trouble her, there is more behind,

But Madam, shall we never visit Rome?

We may perchance, Matilda, danger it
Now there is made this happy reconcilement.

I long to see his Holiness, methinks
I fancy most those by Religion tied
From lust and wedlock; am (you must concieve)
A chaste Platonic Lover.

What is that?
To Love, to love, and not to enjoy?

Fruition
Does but allay those hightned flames, which are
The very life of love.

I am but raw,
(Yet give me leave) you seem, as if Matilda
You owned no Paradise to scorching Aetna.
Platonic loves, (like Purgatorian sires)
Do but prepare us for a perfect bliss,
And make us worthy of a free possession.

Aurelia, have a care my Girl, I fear
By your Romantic tongue, you may be smitten.

If my discourse offend (my Royal Mother)
May I be ever silent rather then
Provoke your hand.

You do mistake the Empress.

No matter, keep her still in Ignorance.

Ours is but talk, Madam, you will pardon it.

It is Ingenious, I gladly could
Hear more on it: but I dare believe by this
They are returned. It Is high time to be gone,
We must be all there: This night puts anen'd
To the Solemnity.

We shall attend.

God save Pope Gregory the Seventh! All. Long live!

Caesar confirms it!

Who Is that mentions Caesar?
For Policy I did complie a while,
It was but to procure the surer ground,
To give the Emperor the stronger blow.
Must Peter stoop to Caesar?

That rests fully,
Sir, in your Holiness to remedy.

My Keys already look and unlock Heaven,
And if they wont fit, I will add a ward
Wherewith they shall serve Earthly Kingdoms,
To make and unmake Princes at my pleasure.

Nobly Resolved, Sir, This will grace your See,
With the more awe and splendor.

And restore
Rome to itsformer fame, that it shall be
Once more the worlds renowned Metropolis.

Henry's accused --

I may as well ask him
Forgiveness of my sins, as to be Pope.

He needs pardon, Sir, or punishment,
Who is so loudly taxed for a truce-breaker.

The Saxons gladly would help to depose him.

A Tyrant.

Cruel, Symoniacal,
A buisie Bodger of Church Livings, Sir.

I hear enough: makes him incapable,
Both of Heavens mercy, and of man's protection.
Let him be Excommunicated! less
Cannot be done to him, does so transgress.

All things succeed as well as heart could wish.

So, this is somewhat toward my Journey now.

What have thou there Jocoso?

Nothing Sir,
But a piece for killing an good old woman,
That did so lave the house still with her nose
As she swept it.

Did it accurately.

To a hair, Sir, no Juggler ever played
Legerdemaine neater, then I shook that same
Into her Hallow tooth.

And is she dead?

Dead, and at heaven I hope. Her son was mad
For haste to bury her the Rushian fashion,
With Hose and Shoes, she was so troublesome
To the chymney-corner (he said) and lived
So unmercifully, to keep that little
She had from him.

'Twas he then gave the piece.

It was, and to say truth, I well deserved it.
It did so plague me Sir, to hatch a cry,
And pray an hours nonsense by the clock.
I must not touch her, if I touched abook.

I warrant 'twas one of those good women
That used to fetch an ill contrived sigh
At Church, in the wrong place; (not hearing well)

She was, all said, hugely well given Sir,

And so art thou, nay if thou can Jocoso
Fanatick-like, murder with prayers and tears,
N'ere fear a livelihood Joc. and when thy ^orks done,
My Fee will make me a Thanksgiving day.

All such odd jobs I give thee.

I thank you Sir.

Come hasten, fetch our things, we must be gone.

Now the Popes License without peradventure
Will be excepted from the Emperor
To gain me leave, (since they are both agreed)
To practice near his Court: My man may play
At lower stakes, and kill men for a trisle:
But where I venture Soul, Life and Estate,
It shall, believe me, cost a saucie rate.

What! we are likely to be all to pieces
Again, Honorio, with the Emperor.

So the news goes, and the Popes Arrogance
Has raised a civil war amongst the Clergy.

I am resolved I Will be of no religion
Till all agree.

I must confess these failings
Show they are but men, but what they would have us learn,
Is of an higher and diviner nature,
In that themselves so hardly practice it.

I cannot blame the German Bishops
To stand for their custom and prerogative.
Is there no Patriarchal seat but Rome?

I Am apt to think they shortly will determine
No Baptized Infant, shall be called a Christian
Except his Name be Peter.

Can there be
Nothing decreed without the Pope Prudentio?
Ought he, and only he, command a Council,
How, where, and when, he please?

This is in Truth,
Novel Encroachment, and he is like to smart for it,
Should the Prelates now join with the Emperor.

Would they were at it once.

Will you engage?

There Is nothing better, Boy, then Wars or Women,
To tame this Fact, and I abhor a Mistress.

The better Warrior.

Those desperate Dam-hims
Who for a while may force the fare of Valor.
To stand a prick or two in vindicating
Their Ladies naughty title to her Honor,
(To gain some Commendation, or a kindness)
Can never serve their Country worth a rush.

Why now I like you: Gentlemen, your Hands,
You Will side with me.

May we else never speed:

Resolve then for the Emperor.

Agreed.

Can her soft nature sport with the afflicted?
I Will never think it, this were to blaspheme
Thy love Aurelia! She comes. --

I Will try him, Sylvia.

It Is prudence!

I bring enlargemen and delight to be
The early messenger of welcome news.

All thanks kind Princess: Madam you are noble:
Your Presence is a freedom.

Yours a Prison.

I see I was but mocked; What Scenes are these?
Such Calmes and Tempests in the self-same breath
Am I offensive?

You have moved him Madam.

Yes, and Love-Sympathy now makes me suffer
A double torture, Magnus! Imust --

Here is a Weapon, if you must dispatch me.

He still misaprenends me Sylvia,
And how undauntedly he talks of death!
Dear Magnus! sheath, the Prison that I talked of
Was nothing else but loves ensnarement.

Now,
You surfeit me with joy, tell't by peice-meales.

My Fathers purpose is to set you free.

I owe it you.

Heaven bless these meeting flames.

Some German Princes lately proving Rebels,
Join with the Saxons now again in Arms.

You Noble Magnus must be one of us.

Swear Loyalty t'assist the Emperor.
Thy Valor's know.

If I must take this oath,
I Will go and bid the Saxons, fight and help 'um;
And then return and willingly submit
To that just death my perjury deserves.
I Will prove as false to you, as to my Country.

Sir you are unhandsome to your Princess.

Peace.

what was it he said? He Would prove as falls
To me as to his Country, was it not so?
This is no slighting but does argue rather
That strong and holy zeal he has for both.
I like him better for this Resolution,
His Constancy to me and that together
Must sind a way He may be falls to neither.

Were It not for these Apostatizing Germans
The Pope should feel by sad Experience,
No curse so heavy, as a Princes anger.

These Rebels must be looked to timely Sir,

I first must make my peace with Rome; or else
His Holiness will have in every Corner,
Blind zealots, that will strive by murdering me
To merit Heaven:

Can man be thought so stupid?

O Madam! Ignorance leads to all mischief.
This makes some bid good marrow to a Snaile,
Or Serpent, and Adore 'um for that day;
The Vulgar learn Rebellion still without book,
Which the Pope shuts and bids 'um read their Lessons
In his commands, which needs must be (he says)
Always Infallible.

I see Matilda,
Thou art Ingenious, and talkst handsomely.
(together with the Empress) I have thought on
Employment for you.

May we serve you Sir.

Thus (...) I beg this Houour.

Rise, it is granted.
Have courage think, to face his Holiness?

You Are like now to enjoy thy wish Matilda.

You see, my Boys, Princes are sometimes made
The Tennis-balls of Fortune, to be bandy'd
At her unconstant pleasure; now full fraught
With good success, soon after wrackt with crosses.

Sir! we are rash and inconsiderate.

He first usurped the Mitre, then asked leave.

My Children blame me Otho, that I did not
Tread upon Hildebrands submissive neck.

You were more Noble, Sir, and Mercyful,
Who could have thought on such Hypocrisy?

We must not now spend all our time in talk,
Aurelia is to tender for this Journey.
Henry, and Conrade, you are iuclin'd to travel.

We must Sir, if it be your Royal pleasure.

Sophrona, you, and you, Matilda shall
Receive your charge anon.

With diligence.

Otho, to you we shall commend the care
Of our affairs at Home.

I shall be faithful.

The Sun sometimes is darkened with Ecclipses;
And the most fixed Stats do seem to twinkle;
So must my splendor for a while be clouded:
And I! The Pilgrim-Prince, now plainly show,
Monarchs, like Tides, do Ebb, as well as Flow.

The powers above must needs approve our love.
Their secret wisdom does so prosper it.
How Melancholy would the Court be now?
Were it nor for, you know my meaning Sylvia.

Madam, for some divertisement, let us go
To see the Mask acted to day.

Agreed.
And let us go disguised without Attendants.

Aurelia you are Queen we will only act
At your command, now in your Fathers absence.

You Are Generous. Then my first endeavour's for
Some worthy Honor on your Country men.
(For your sake Otho) what shall Magnus be?

Thanks to our Noble Viceroy, I enjoy,
A Happiness ample enough in my
Freedom from Prison, and that Oath I hated.
But cheisly, Madam, in your government.

This is handsome, I fear I come to late.

What shall be Magnus? Nothing for Rodolphus.

Nor Frederick.

We Will make our selves, when once
We come in the field, good Otho, give us quickly
Some Martial Office or our Swords will rust.

We Will meet to night (if it may please the Princess!)
In Council, where we all may know our charge.

You may Command it Sir.

We shall attend.

Madam you are forgetful.

Now we will go.
Most Noble Viceroy I must crave your leave
This afternoon to take some private repast.

Madam, you degrade your self to ask it.

I in my Fathers absence owe you duty.

Might I entreat your Love it were an Honor.

You cannot choose but have it in obedience.

Adeiu sweet Princess.

Yours

Farewell Sylvia.
I am resolved Harrie shall never come here,
Nor his two Sons; yet we usurpers love
To guild our Titles with some show of ^ight.
There is but one let and I Will straight remove it.
Aurelia could I once make thee my own,
I were for ever stablish'd in my Throne.

Dull times Jocoso.

They can never hold.

Why Prithee.

I Faith if they do Master,
I must like the Peruvian Cannibals,
Feast it with man's flesh, and it must be mine own.
Cur Collops here, Sir, and be merry with 'um
They Will ast as long as I, and there is an end.

Thou talkst too frolic, to be starved Jocoso.
I am already got into their fashion,
Who make their meals either with Mear, or Drink,
Not both together, our trade will not maintain it.

My takings are but small, the wars spoil all.

Pox on it, Men are grown both hard, and holy;
I would now murder, half as cheap again
As I did formerly, to gain some custom.

My takings too lie all in Preservations,
Were it not for the French --

I have observed
That is the prettiest strange distemper Master,
It like a cunning Gamester has its salf pass,
Makes at the lower parts, and hits the Nose.

And then there is fine work that will pay us well.
TO erect a new bridge, or uphold the old one.
Here comes a Customer.

What want you Sir?

Dwells here Brazutus?

There Is my Master Sir.

A word or two in private.

I shall Sir.

O pox! I warrant he is peppered by's stradling.

Are we not somewhat of the latest Sylvia?

Madam, they say it don't begin till four.

Let us make haste.

What want you Ladies, pray?
Here dweleth that Renowned Don Brazutus,
That most famous Italian Physician.

Heaven bless me, is not Otho yonder whispering?

The very same, what makes he here so private?

I strange! pass on, he cannot know us Sylvia.

Those two past by, were pretty Girls I swear
If those Faces I saw were all their own.
But if they were, they are not for our purpose:
We cannot live, but by good Gentlewomen,
That undress Nature, as they dress to bed.
At night throw off their Perewigs, and their Noses.
Pull out their Teeth, and lay aside their Eyes.

I warrant Sir.

There is on other way
But this to gain Aurelia, and prepare
A free and valid passage to my suit.
Her carriage I confess seems plausible,
Yet it is nothing but Dissimulation.
Did not I see which way her amorous eye went,
And how 'twas only fixed on him? Brazutus,
Be quick and private.

As your own breast Sir.
I am beholding to my good old Master.
The Pope has taught me here a blessed Lesson.
Now Mental Reservation, saves my neck,
And no way hurts my Purse, I Will out with all:
Should she love Magnus, as I am persuaded,
Aurelia's pay will excel that of Otho's.
Jocoso, Let Us go in I Will give thee, Boy,
One point of Wine, to cheer thee, these sad times.

My Master has a piece, I warrant you
He is so free, this looked like a good chapman,
A curse upon this Primogeniture!
But a few minutes create all this trouble;
My Elder Brother carries all the Land,
And I may feed on Gallipots, and glasses.
Before I Will starve thus like a silly Elfe,
I am a Knave, if I don't Hang my self

The Emperor's arrived.

Fully Incensed I guess
Against the Pope.

We Will tame this mad usurper.

I wish, Honorio, this Religious Rebel,
Were well chastis'd.

If his Revenge be dull,
We Will whet his sword, Sir, with our active spirits.

First, we must understand the Princes mind,
Before we be to forward, Junio.
Only we will give him leave to pick our meaning,
And our designs, out of our costly banquets,
And bounteous Entertainments.

He shall read
These civil discords in the neat-wrought Sweet meats.

I am not for these woman's toys, but if
The Wine be good, I Will carouse wholeones to Him,
And Fancy the Pope merrily tumbling down.

Ha, ha, ha.

This is a sharp and bitter season for 'um.

I hear the Empress comes, and her two Sons
With a most Noble Train of handsome Ladies.

They do not come, I hope, to fight with these.
If any thing does make me run away,
'Twill be a woman's shreicks.

Ill, and harsh sounds
But you cannot hear 'um, for the Drums and Trumpets.

They will secure these in the Littadel.

Poor souls! It cannot but be hard servise to 'um.
They never saw such weather in their Chambers,
Which they do always keep this winter quarters.
They know no Snow, but what their Wash-ball makes,
Nor Ice, but curious artificial Jellies:
Bold Boreas will disturb this Lock, that Curle,
So put them to it.

Shame on their tenderness!
If I marry it shall de some Amazon,
Can fight with one hand, and give suck with the other.

For all your merry talking, Gentlemen,
Let Us not be tardy to salute the Prince.

True, they deserve our early loves. No age,
Can Parrallel, this Royal Pilgrimage.

I Will be as frigid to him as the Alps,
And the deep winter, now they travel in.

Make him your Slave, Dread Sir, to hold your Stirrup:
Give him a good cuff if he don't do it right.

Tread on him Sir, when you get up your Horse.

I now can make him any thing or nothing.
Having him in a treble twist; I hear,
The German Bishops back my censure, and
Their Princes wont comply, without my pardon.

Sir The Embassy's come.

Admit them quickly,
Their Sex commands civil Respect, from all.

Thus low we beg your Honor.

Your Business.

Your Emperor lays his Scepter at your feet.

Is It come to this? It was but lately, I
Must ask Him leave to put my Mitre on.

Sir, we appeal to you, as unto Heaven,
For Clemency, abstract from all revenge,
Or any thought on it.

True. Yet sinners must
Know by our frowns wherein they have offended.

This he does well, Sir, and is humbled for it.

If there be merit (next your Holiness)
What can be Higher then a Princes Fasting?

Three days already, all disrobed, and barefoot.

We have passed through the Island Purgatory,
In our cold progress; nor grudge we this penance,
T'arrive at Bliss, we mean, your Holiness;
Where 'twere not Venial now, to doubt of Mercy,
For which I cannot but adore your presence.

She cannot be denied, this Ladies converse
Becomes a Patriarch, it is so sublime:
Let Us go confer about this buisnes.

Gladly.

Madam, for your sakes I will think upon
Some terms of Pardon, (may they be accepted)
You shall anon receive ^um privately.

You Crown our wishes.

I Will run with this news.

Privately! Let me see! a well-thought Lady,
Must act a subtle niceness, to keep up
Her reputation, whatsoere she prove,
Were He another man, this might create
An ill conception of me: but I hope
There can be no such danger, in the Pope,

I wonder Conrade, what the effect will be.

Had I but had my wish, it never should
Have come to this.

You see the Italian Princes
Receive us Nobly, take no notice, Conrade,
At all, of the Execration.

I have that
Within my breast, cannot abide there long:
It swells to fast.

Prithee declare what is it?

Will you swear secrecy, and courage then?

I dare to you.

You shall be Emperor,
My Father dotes.

We will divide this Honuor.

I Will ask no more, and -- They come.

Let us stand here, this is the privatest.

Let him b' admitted with his Royal Habet,
And order that a Banquet be prepared
Without delay.

That Is better then his blessing.

You see now Ladies, how my full desires
Do well concur with yours in act of grace.

Thanks to your Holiness we find it so.

It well becomes, Sir, your Paternal Bowels.

Your Honor, (with the Emperors Piety)
Does stand engaged, Matilda, to secure
The Just performance of what is offered.

VVhat'ere is mine, Sir, may it be thought worthy,
I Will freely stake to have your will fullfil'd.

I know thou 'rt Noble, if thou fancy'st Rome
Command our Court.

This is exact Love-talk.

In my heart the old fellow will prove wanton,

I must perforce awhile dissemble it
Thanks Holy Father.

This is brave submission.

You have our Absolution, and our Love.

Heaven prosper, and continue these embraces!

Let us refresh our selves! Fall to, Matilda.
Music plays and they sing within.

Your Civil jarrs
Are the worst Wars:
But now such dangers cease:
Those Mortal Gods,
That were at odds,
Conclude an happy Peace.
It is most pleasant Harmony,
When Crown and Mitre do agree.
We all then fear
Sad darkness near,
When Heaven's Two great Lights fight:
Whilst Prince and Pope
Clash; there is no hope,
But the worlds fatal night.

But it is most pleasant Harmony,
When Crown and Mitre do agree.

I see the Cardinals Caps are good for somewhat.

They hold almost a Charger full of March-paines.

Your Bounty has obliged us, Sir.

Accept it.
Now our next buisness, is to confirm all
Before the Sacred Alter.

We attend you.

The face of things, methinks, seems but untowardly,
I do not like it, Conrade, Peace can never
Suit with the nature, and complexion
Of our designs, our sport must be in Tempests.

I warrant you, rather then baulk the action,
If we find discords slow, we will make a faction.

Now Master there is hopes of a Trade again,
Things fadge so well at Rome.

We shall anon
Have company.

I find the Market mends.
The Clowns begin to draw their Cat-string Purses,
And call so boldly for a Pot for Joane.

They drooped but now, I saw, most heavily,
With their Chops leaning on their Staves, a listening,
And enquiring of every one they met,
Whether they thought this War would cause a Land Tax.

But now they are as brisk.

We Will try their Pockets.

It Is never well but when the Glove goes, Master.

The Empress will I hear honor our sport.

I Will leap out of my skin, and in again.

I strange they tarry.

Pox on it nothing, but
Two bawling fellows on a Ladder yonder,
Detain 'um: now they come.

Yonder he is.

Look, Jack shall see him.

Poor Knave, what ailes He?

Alas woman he has had an Ague this six weeks.
They say this Monster-banke knows what is good for it.

Gentlemen, By the help of a Divine hand, I can Cure all those Distempers,
mentioned in your Paper, I need not name them. Only I am to tell you, amongst
the rest, there is a Rare Jesuitical Powder, made of the skin of the Serpent
the Devil possessed, when he seduced Eve. That outwardly applied, will charm
away any Ague, be it Tertian, Quartan, on Quotidian


I am glad of that.

I purchased it by my Intimacy at Rome, the Great-great-grandmother of all
Antiquity. No one else has it.

Let Us see Jocoso.


Master mind me

The price of all my things.

Master my things!

The price of all my things, with the Directory how to use them, is Three
Shillings.


Master!

But because my time is not long with you, I shall in love give you six pence.


Master, my things!

So that you shall have all mine, and Jocoso 's for three shillings in the
whole


Gentlemen your Gloves.

With my Balls you may scrub up old Clothes and Faces, and make them look like
new


Give me the whole parcel.

And me.

And me.

My Balls help a wench to a husband quickly.
The take away all scurff, scabs and wrinckles,
redness, freckles, pimples, or any unhandsomness in the flesh.

Gentlemen, if any of you be rich enough for the Gout, you must know I wrought
an incomparable Cure of this lately, in Italy, on the Popes great Toe


What Is the matter?

What a pox do all these Fools harkning to a couple of Knaves?

You make a gleak of us Gaffer.

Are you minded to have your po. po. Pockets picked?

You Are an old Rogue.

Friend, about your buisness.

Kiss my Bumme.

Were I a little nearer, my foot should sweetly.

Mind him not pray, He Is Drunk, Sir.

Kiss my Bumme!

I Would drum a march on it.

Kiss my Bu, Bu, Bumme!

Good now be quiet.

Were not this fellow drunk now, Gentlemen,
I Would make him a sad example, we come not
Here, Sirs, without leave from the Emperor.
And a full License from his Holiness.
Dispatch Jocoso.

I have done! Here com's an object of Charity.

Pray Sir!

Set down good woman.

Which Tooth is it? She has but that.

It Is Ha, Hallow Sir.

It makes your breath stinck.
It Is done.

I find ease.

You have eased nature I think.

smells the tooth.
What must you have.

I have enough already.

Pray Sir speak!

Don't drop Curt'sies so, for fear your Curt'sies drop.

I Would willingly content you.

Good goodwife-house-of-Office do not follow me, so!

You must speak in my ear, Sir.

Oh hell! must I come so near her. I Will have nothing Gammer!

Thank you, Sir, I am deaf.

Pox on her, she has neither ears, nor nose.

Ha, ha, ha.

This goes now amongst my Regiment of Teeth.
Each one (like those, I read, which Cadmus sowed,
May prove a Man of reputation.
Do you not here, Sir, read a learned Artist,
As well, as in those sixteen straggling Letters
He brought to Greece? And now kind Gentlemen
Be pleased to walk in, (Hang me if I lie)
You shall see wonders of Activity.

For you we had designed our lives and fortunes.

This is an everlasting Infamy,
Sir, to your Royal Empire.

He Is a Lecher.
A murderer, and by lewd practices
Set on the Papacy.

Had my dull Brain,
From your first kindness apprehended you,
This nere had bin.

In you were all our hopes,
Whom we esteemed the Patron of all Justice,
The Alter and sole Bulwark of the Laws

We valued not his Excommunication.

Those civil discords of the German Prinsce
Forced me to get this off, on such conditions,
Hell's Torment's nothing to 'um. I must stand
To the Popes Judgment; Answer mine accusers:
If guilty, quietly resign my Crowns,
In the mean time, live privately: release
My Subjects from their Loyalty, and Oath.
And which is worst, never attempt revenge.

But that good manners here constrained a patience
I had not heard you half out, 'twas such pain.

He strives in all this but to enslave you to him.

And works his pleasure on you, thus disarmed.

We Are Idle still.

Our Swords shall cut this League.

The Soul can be obliged to nothing, but
What Is free, and voluntary.

Sir, we hear
Otho Rebels, and with a numerous Army
Bids you defiance.

Aided with Rodolphus.

More Mischief! Your assistance Gentlemen.

It Is ready, Sir, most willingly.

And ours.

First we will secure Home, next succeeds thy doom,
Thy doom, Proud Metropolitan of Rome.

Prepare all things in order for the Bath.
I hope by this your perfect in your Task.

We are, Dear Madam,

And are happy in 'um.

Observe your charge, I follow.

We obey.

It Is fine! the whole world is at my command.
Although I cannot bear the name of Pope,
I have the power fully, under him.
This Duke, that Cardinal, this Lord, that Abbot,
Are all my Creatures, owe me suit and servise.
All the Revenues of Rome's Mother Church
Are scarce enough now, to maintain a Mistress.
A Lady well dressed, like a Pers'an Madam
VVares several cities on her; so must I.
The Peter Pence will find me Pins and Laces.
And --

What alone, at thy private contemplations?
Let none confess thee but my self, Matilda.

Sir, you best know my secret passions.

I do, and can best pardon 'um.

Your Cardinals.
I must retire till anon.

Your buisness.

Sir, The Emperor is started from his Covenant
Already, and with the Italian Nobles
Conspire your ruin.

Most unheard of falsehood!
We must bestir us to be ready for 'um.
Here now I want my good old Friend Brazutus.
Cannot we put confidence in Alter-vowes?
Nay; If once such Assurances be crossed
As These; I Will burn the consecrated Host.

Sirs, Now, now, let us behave our selves like men!
The stak's the Cerman Empire, and we will share it,
Amongst us three: we will share it equally.

Will you yield Traitors?

If yo'have valor for it.

Ye shall have mercy.

Dandle Fools and Children.

Kingdoms are more worth then to part with so.

Force the doors open, Sirs.
We have free entrance.

Magnus is poisoned Otho, and his Ghost
Comes to revenge his Death.

Villain, I am cheated.

We are betrayed!

They come like lightning on us!

Stand to it Rodolphus.

Now

Pox on it! they fled, fore I had half my sill.
Such wars as these starve a good stomackt Sword

They had good Heels. The Emperor's safe I see.

Prudentio Thanks! Thanks to you Noble Sirs!
To you we owe this conquest.

To your Courage.

And Wisdom, Sir, we must ascribe this Honor.

Pox! 'Twas a skirmish not worth talking of.

Magnus!

The Three-Head-Traytors have their due deserts,
Rodolphus, Sir, and Frederick are slain
By the these your Noble Sons.

Was this your Act, My Boys?

Faith fine Beginnings, Hah, Honorio.

True.

Thanks to good Fortune, Sir.

They Are modest too.

Now Gentlemen, your swords have carved your way
To a most free, and well-deserved welcome,
To what 'ere Germany affords.

All thanks.

I long almost to see Aurelia.

She Will not a little triumph at this news.

Mag. Do you conduct the Empress to us.

Sir, I obey.

Let Us go.

We all attend.

Ill luck, the old man escaped so, were He dead
We'd never talk of Primogeniture.
But be sworn Colleagues in the Empire, Conrade.

Here we were forced to fight, to help to save him,
We, and our hopes else had been lost for ever,
But now there is an other War behind,
May order all things, Harrie, to our mind.

Are you resolved to Antidate his death,
And weep his Dirge, before hand, Madam?

I saw him murdered, in my dream last night,
And felt the sword that did it, Sylvia!

These be but idle Fancies; He Is alive!

He Is run through (here I bleed) He Is run through here!

A Messenger! what News!

Where Is the Princess?
Madam!

I have but a few minutes now!

Your Royal Father has the Victory.

How would I fain know, what I fear to know!

Madam! The Empress with the two young Princes
Are safe returned.

Still Impertinent!

And --

Now it comes! quick rid me out of pain.
Speak, how does Magnus?

They are all at hand.

He knows not Magnus, Madam! Now they come.

And now I see him Sylvia, or his Ghost.
Your Royal Blessings both!

The Heavens preserve
My Dear Aurelia.

How do, my Child?

Thanks Royal Mother: How is it Magnus?

Sir, you much Honor us to show such Treasure.

Is not she tempting, Junio?

In her Sex.
You know I mind no face but what is in Breeches,
And so may make a fit Companion,
For Mars, or Bachus, Fighting, boy, or Drinking.

Sirs, you shall taste our Liquor, and accept
A large Heart, with a slender Entertainment.

Oh Sir, you all oblige us by your kindness.

'Twas to do somewhat that can never be done.
'Twas to do somewhat to deserve Aurelia
And next you, to Revenge that Treachery
I always hated.

You were ever Noble

Magnus is dead! don't he affright you Madam?

Surely thou art some Sybil, Sylvia.

My Brothers! Brothers!
Lives Aurelia?
And Sylvia too?

Welcome sweet Princes!

What,
You killed Rodolphus, and You Frederick.

And Magnus, Otho. Now she blushes Conrade.

It Is but your Fancy.

We must not delay.
They will but just recruit, and then for Rome.
Come Sister.

We will follow. Sylvia!
Compose thy self for Mirth, Girl!

I do, Madam,
And am prepared to frolic, any how
You shall Command.

The Heavens n're smiled, till now.

Matilda! what means this? Read Gentlemen!
I am the Privy Council of his breast
(She writes) Beware Brazutus! I live yet,
Free from all poison, don't I? Well Matilda,
Shall not repent this kindness.

This is he
Poisoned Seven Popes to make use of this.

Lives here Brazutus?

And his Man Jocoso.

Beggarly Urchin! He Will kill any one,
For a Pot, Ten-groats, and the dead corpse in,
To make some Mummia for the Apothecaries.

Were they for this, thus long allowed our Court?

Sir, This was he, that should have poisoned Magnus.

To you we leave th'inspection of this buisness
Together Henry, with the government.

I shall be Just, Sir, May you safe return!

Be mindful of your promise Hal.

Fear nothing.

Conrade goes.

We shall miss his Valor else.

Thanks for your Noble thoughts Prudentio.

Would we could fly Honorio to the wars
On some swift-whinged Horses.

Oh brave Junio.

Farewell! From this time shall my Reign take date,
Will Magnus second now, this pleasing Fate.

I feared thee Magnus, Magnus I did.

Dear Madam!
You that had got such Interest in my heart,
Methinks should know what is in it. There Is truth written,
Not in dull Characters, but large, and lasting.

Enough!

Hymen cannot be wanting long.
(Madam) That blush did well become a Lady,
That must anon be chastely ravished.

Sylvia, you talk. The Empress.

Noble Magnus!

Madam, was not your Journey tedious.

'Twas.
And now returned we must confess, to you
We owe our selves and Kingdoms, and that ease
They do afford.

Did hear that Sylvia?

This Honor justly appertains
To the Emperor, and Your Heroic sons.
Pray do 'um Justice.

Courage never braggs.
Harrie how is it.

I left 'um well, and merry.
Magnus a word or two with you, in secreet.

What Is become of Matilda, Royal Mother?
That I was thus forgetful, not to ask
Till now.

She Is grown obsequious to the Pope,
And wants for nothing.

Oh me! I thought him
Still past a woman, by the Papian Law.

She talked indeed at first Amorously
Of the old Man.

You say right Sylvia.

Aurelia's wise, chaste, fair.

I know all this,
And yet I Will wedd my grave, first

Farewell then.
Avoid the Court upon my high Displeasure

They Are moved!

What means all this?

Let us enquire.

My Joys are Dashed still, as they do begin
The Sun but just appeared, and is clapped in.

And let him fly! My pomp will be the same.
(My hopes are built upon undoubted grounds:)
Victor will be as good as Gregory.
Command the Card'nals to recieve my pleasure.

We shall

How like you Sirs, my Dress to day?

As it becomes the Empress of the world.

I know no reason for the Salique Law,
But that a woman may be fit to govern,
Or why do Poets talk of Juno Pallas.
Place power and wisdom in the Female Gender?
Had not dame Nature cut us out to Rule,
She never would have given us such desires,
We Will give men leave to think we think them wise,
But yet we know our strength: all States, and Persons,
(Act we discreetly) may be conquered
By our well managed favors.

Without. The day's our own.
Secure all there.

The buisness is effected.

They cannot be hired to turn again: (Hare-like)
One Run a Post down, with his eyes behind.

Make room-there, stand back

The Cardinals.

Great Sir! thus low accept my Loyalty.

Matilda, rise, we have sufficient proof often.
Fathful, and politic were thy designs
To which we owe this bloudless victory.
How may we now requite this love?

Our selves and service, Sirs, must be our Princes
Pure from all Mercenarie purposes.

True. Yet Matilda we must not discourage
Our Subjects duties with Ingratitude.

Then please me, Sir, in pleasuring your self,
In the Election of a Worthy Pope.
Victor's demeanouors speak him such.

We never
Sir heard the contrary.

I do approve him.

Thanks mighty Prince!

God save Pope Victor the third.

Hildebrand's Name did Anagramatize
His Nature, (I HEL-BRANDD) and so he was.

He was indeed the Worlds Incendiarie.

A Legion Rebel, (in a wicked Pope)
Must be a Complication of Traitors.

He makes a thousand hardy-Regicides
With Pardons in their Pockets, and hopes of
Immediate access into Paradise:
With a fair promise to be Canonized.

And then Men run on in their villainies
As eagerly as e're the Pope run from us.
Pox on him! now the wars are done, and now
We may make Mustard with our Cannon-bullets,
And stick our Swords up to hang Scare-crows on.

Will It please Caesar now to grace our Court.

Thanks to Your Holiness. Come kind Matilda.
Come Gentlemen, you shall participate.

We shall attend.

God save Caesar and Pope Victor!

My Revenge cannot stay the old man's pace.
I looked for all the Empire, half, was promised:
And now he writes, I must submissively
Yield to the Portion, of a Younger Brother:
And wait the leisure of the Destinies,
Or never be admitted to his Court.
Soldiers! rest confident in my Rewards!
And let them highly animate your courage!
I will not make a meal, nor close mine eyes,
Until I Am Emperor of Germany.

What are you? Come, for Reconciliation?
I come to tell you, Sir, Your Fathers dead.

Dead!

He no sooner heard your Brothers aim,
(But He replied) 'twas time he was Extinguished,
Finding that short life, he had yet behind
Burnt like a snuff, so noisome to his issue,
His own Son Henry! And with that, he funck.

Is he quite dead?

Dead.

There Is one let Removed.

They Come, let us prepare.
Brave Conrade, yield!

How like a flattering Parret, the Fool talks!
Brave Conrade!

It Is your Elder Brothers Right.

Pox on it! Can High and Noble Spirits, bent
For a Kingdom, stand to tell first, and Second?
Fight, Fight! I Will quickly make a younger Brother
Of thee Magnus.

There was no way but death.

We have the Conquest, Sir, they are quite Routed.

Conveigh this Corpse to Solemn Funeral,
We cannot but Lament Bold Conrade's Fall.

Along, Along!

What are we apprehended for?

The Emperor will tell you.

Come along.

So I can, you Hunger-starved-Hound
Without your Haleing.

They are very cheats.

They mump'd poor Besse.

Their things w'ant worth a Farthing.

Hang 'um, hang 'um they do but gull the Country.

This days work shall cost you dear.

'Tmay cost your life.

I had a License from His Royal Father:
Nor will the Princess thank you for this rudeness.

We Have order never fear't for what we do.

You Have spoiled a Chymistrie cost (God kowes what)

You Have brained the Gallipots, ye Rogues! the stuff
Runs out, shall cost you sauce, I warrant you.

Come, come, a Halter will soon spoil your railing.

You may deserve it first.

Hang'um quick, Hang'um

Peace, The Emperor.

Take heed you be'nt in the old woman's pickle,
By and by, Sirrah.

Go you Bob-tail'd Whores.

You whore-son Arse-gut!

Ha, ha, ha.

Peace the Emperor

Magnus, I am obliged. --

Sir, here is the Prisoner.

Brazutus! you endeavored to poison
Our Royal Father.

Sir, I Am ignorant.

If you conceal't I shall the rather think it.

Perhaps, Matilda might not send the Letter,
Pope Gregory intended for this purpose.

Confess all or else you dye.

I n'ere, Sir, murdered any in my life.

The old Woman. (I hate lying)

I did but faign that, Sir, to get his service.

How now Brazutus?

Sir, this is but malice.

If clear in this yet they may both be faulty.

Declare Brazutus what you're committed,
And on a Princes word, you shall have mercy.
(For your sake Magnus and Aurelia's.)

If I am guilty, Sir, of this I Am taxed of,
May I for ever be debarred your bounty.

Speak all you know, or ever did, Jocoso.
If you are found in a tittle falls, you dye.

I never murdered any but my Mother,
Which Nature had almost done to my Hand.
Besides it was my Elder Brothers doings.
She lived so long He thought she was Immortal.
His mind was once, to try whether she would drown:
But I was forced at last to do her work
For a mean Fee; I might have starved else, Sir.
Your mercy, Sir, your mercy!

Horrid Villain!

But that your word joined with the Jubilee
Of your first Reign, pleads somewhat, Sir, for life,
There could be no escaping of the Gallows:
However pray think on some punishment
That may be next to it.

Friends, hear your sentence.
Brazutus! You Equivocated with us,
More then Jocoso in your sly confession.
(Who poisoned a Septinary of Popes!
Both shall live in perpetual Prisonment:
look to them Officers, and see that daily
A hard allowance, mind them of their faults.

Sir We obey.

It Is well ye escape so

Come my Friend, Jocoso.

Pox on your Friendship, would we n'ere had met!
How Intimate I must be now with Hell!

The best on it is, old age, ill-us'd
Cannot suffer me, to be Tenant to a Prison long!

Magnus! whatever the German Empire now
Rightly descended to me, will afford,
Command it freely.

May Heaven prosper Caesar!

Look yonder Sylvia.

I like this well.

Must Magnus now be Banished?

Sweet Aurelia!
I can as soon be banished from my self.
(Give me leave Sister) You will have a man,
Made up of Love, of Justice, and of Honor.
I might have called these Virtues into question,
Had he yielded to me in hindering
My Fathers Return, to his Empire: which
None but the Fates prevented.

Heaven Bless Caesar!

Next we must Palliate Sophrona's grief.

That must be Magnus in your Nuptials.
Great Duke of Saxony! accept your Duchess,
Accept of your Aurelia!

I fly to Him.

Blessed pair, may yours no more prove April-joyes!

We prize things most got through a world of Crosses.

When those are quite blown over: and now may
You (like the City Alexandria)
Enjoy a constant Sunshine every day!

I am to tell you (Gentlemen!) The Play
Caesar 's sad Tragoedie, you saw to day.
Should any Momus cry, it cannot be true.
A man Religious, and a Rebel, too.
Carp at the Title first, and next the Plot,
And then the Sense, the Language, and what not!
Condemn this Poison, this Lust, and that Treason,
And swear, our Pilgrim-Prince cannot stand to reason;
(But as a Vulgar Error straight must be
Damned with the Belisarian Poverty.)
Our Poet does confess, and it is His glory,
He played the Theif, he says, and stole the story
From men of Trust, who write, the thing was so,
Acted about Six Hundred years ago.
But yet all this will not do He understands,
Nothing will pass for good, without your Hands.
For which great favor, (she who did express
Her self so handsome to his Holiness.)
-- Witty Matilda pleads; and it is hard hap,
If such a freindly Girl don't get a clap.

