THe Learned Sons of Athens have thought good,
Long heard, but never seen, felt nor understood;
In complaisance, no longer stout nor proud,
For once to unmask, and prep from out their Cloud.
Believe't -- it is no small condescending Graces
When such Seraphicks come to show their faces.
But have a care how it is you look before ye,
And gaze too long too bold on such fall Glory.
And now, Sirs, for our great Heroic Drama,
The History of our fair Heirs of Fama;
Arts brazen Leaves, and Wisdoms massiest Volumn,
Learnings Nil ultra, Wits Herculean Colomn;
Nature's Surveyors General, the Great All,
Athens, whose vast Ecliptic girts the Ball.
For these Illustrious Heroes kindly greeting,
In elevated Coffee Cockloft meeting:
Stage somewhat of the narrow'st -- But no matter,
TO excuse our humble Scenes, and small-Theatre,
So coopt, so pent -- to own their larger due,
Such Greatness should descend to mortal view,
In pomp and state, their full Majestic mein,
Like their great Brentford Brothers, in Machine.

OH Gentlemen if you love me, I must beg one favor of you.


What Is that, honest Friend?


Only that you would kindly please to withdraw into another Room.


Withdraw! for what?


Oh Sir, the Society, the Society --


What the Devil does he mean?


The Athenian Society Gentlemen --


Oh! the Athenians!


They are just now come to sit, and this is their Sessions Room.


This! What is the man mad? Mercers Chapel or Gresham College thou would
say


No, nor Gotham College neither. I tell you this very Room Gentlemen, and they
are just now coming


Ouns, man, this Room will not hold ten people; and what do thou talk of the
whole Athenian Society


Why, how many do you take 'em to be?


Marry! A brace of scores I suppose.


A brace of scores quoth a! when I dined 'em all yesterday with a groats worth
of Ox-cheek


How man! Have they Camelion stomachs then?


No, nor Cannibal ones neither. But what would you have three men eat?


Three! How no more of 'em?


Ay, and a jolly Company too; more by half than the Revenue will maintain. But
pray Gentlemen favor me with the Room


Fair and softly, good Landlord. If this wonderful Athenian Senate is no more
than a poor Triumvirate, pray let us know who these Learned Sparks are


Lord Sir! to stay to tell stories --


No grumbling; we must have their Genealogies and Histories too before we stir
a foot


If you must then! -- Well, the first, the Chairman, to speak in the vulgar
phrase, is a Country Parson, by birth a Grubstreetonian, in his Sacerdotal
Capacity a Lincolnshire Sermonian; but at present strol'd and eloped from his
Canonical drudgery, and translated to an Athenian Heliconian; in plain! English
the Poetry and Divinity Professor of the Society. To sum up his glory

His Mother, Sir, sells Cheese by the Town-walls,
And him, her dear Sir Astrophel she calls.

What a sublime Spirit of Coffee is here!


The second a Doctor of Physic --


How, a Doctor!


Yes, and as illustrious a one as ever put Bill to Post whose Right famous
Renown* shall never dye, as long as his Immortal Tetrachymagogon lives


That doughty Virtuoso! That individual puissant Operator! Nay thou have hit of
a Doctor, in the name of Aesculapius


Well, Landlord, to the third: What sort of a Quack is he?


Quack! have a care what you say: I Would have you to know he scorns your words;
he is neither Quack nor Physician


But a Politician!


Politician! no Sir, a Mathematician.


Oh, a Mathematician!


But pray Gentlemen let me entreat you --


Yes, thou have* won the field. The Room is thine;

To the Athenian Worthies we resign*
Well, let the mighty Grubstreet Heliconian,
And the Renowned Tetrachymagogonian,
That great oraculous bold Meeter-maker,
And this no less illustrious Piss pot shaker,
Joined with their doughty Mathematick Squire,
The quondam great Amanuense of Dyer;
Under proud Roos of Poll the Coffee-man,
In trine Conjunction sit Wits great Divan.

Mr. Stuff, before the House sits call over the Roll.


I shall Sir. Obadiah Grub.


Here.


Jerry Squirt.


Here.


Jo. Dash.


Here.


A whole House Gentlemen; not a member wanting.


Right; a full Sessions.


Now Brother Athenians, to the great business of the day; I have a learned
proposition --


Hold Sir, no speaking before Mr. Chairman is seated.


And now Mr. Squirt, as our Royal Brother of Brentford says,

Since fair occasion seems so debonair,
Do you take that; and I will take this Chair.
Gentlemen before you fall upon business, do you see, and debate as Athenians,
do you see, give me leave to thrust in a word as a head venturer amongst you,
do you see; I desire your Reverences to consider it is not long since you had your
mouths stopped, do you see


Our Mercury silenced you mean.


And it cost me near thirty Guineas for a Golden Court-key to unlock 'em again,
do you see: It Is trus, I got a kind of a Patent by it, and set up our Society a
complete Corporation, with a full promise of suppressing all Interlopers,
whether Lord or Lady Mercuries, etc. and so the Money was not ill laid out.
However I must desire you to consider seriously that a poor Impression of 35
single quires of Mercuries, and above half of them Returned, do you see, will be
a long time a raising of that sum; and therefore you must not take it ill if I
pinch Commons a little, and retrench superfluities, till I retrieve that loss,
do you see


Look you Sir, we are considering men, as you say, and acquiesce to your great
Reason


Yes Mr. Stuff, all we can pinch we will. But this by the way you must consider
too, That the great Motto of our Society i

Magister Artium Ingeniique Largitor Venture --
And therefore, sweet Sir, you must strain as far as e're you can to cherish
and envigorate the drooping Spirit of Athens in your ever obsequious and
laborious Drudges and Vassals


Well Gentlemen* I stand corrected, and shall stretch my utmost ability to
carry on the Cause


Who Is that knocks so unmannerly at the door? Lord, what Impudence is this
World made of? Poll, go look out and see what rude fellow's that


If he has business of moment, admit him.


I shall Sir.


But hold; one clause more in your Commission. Admit him, but first correct his
sawciness


Nay Brother, this grievance is intolerable: For my part, I know no reason why
this August Assembly should not be treated with all the respect due to a
Council Chamger


Right Brother; and have the attending Petitioners scrape, not knock for
Admittance


There I agree with you both. It Is my Vote therefore that our Order be
immediately issued forth for due observation accordingly


The Gentleman that spoke last has advised well, and has my Vote of Concurrence.


And mine. Therefore Resolved Nomine Contradicente.


It Is well you have acknowledged your offense: But for this first fault your
submission shall be accepted. But see that you mend your manners by way of
Atonement


Lord, are they such great folks then? -- Well, I am resolved to rummage my
Perecrany and rattle my Brains together for a Learned Speech to accost their
High and Mightynesses


Well friend, who are you?


I am, and shall please your Learned Profundity, by occupation a Sub-warden to
the right famous College in Blow-bladder Precinct, and by my present
Commission a small Envoy, from a long Student and Graduate in that Honorable
Society, who humbly offers to your Athenian discussion this weighty
Interrogatory, as you will find in the within contents


From a Recluse in that Honorable Cell. A Student and Graduate too, says he!


A Brother Collegiate, a Bird (pardon the humility of the phrase) of our own
Feather; a Professor, no doubt, of the Mercurial Arts and Sciences


Right Brother; and as a person thus dignified and distinguished (to use my own
Orthodox Dialect) 'twill be but breeding and good manners, as a natural Respect
from one Learned Society to another, to treat this worthy Interrogater with all
suitable Devoirs and Civility


Right worthily proposed.


And therefore friend, as to your affair before us, we acknowledge your
Credentials, and accept your Embassy. Return then to your Master, and assure
him that his Negotiation shall be answered with all Application and Dispatch,
both to our own glory and his full satisfaction. And withal, return the best
Respects and Esteem of this Honorable Society to himself and the rest of his
Brethren Students and Cloysterers, our ever-valued Colleagues and Allies


Right worthy Sir, I shall deliver him your Commands, and am farther
commissioned to tell your Honors, That for your high favor in unnoosing this
knot for him, if ever he gets his Snow-hill Doublet off his back, without
taking his leave in a Paddington Collar; or to speak plainer in our own
College language: if he has but the honor of riding off Right-hand-man of the
Independent Troop, he is resolved to make you his personal acknowledgment for
this signal obligation


Now Brother, let us read and peruse. Opens the Letter.

Reads. Most Learned and most Honored Athenians,

YOur so well known, and no less admired, and (to add one Epithete more) your
ever resounding Worth and Merit, has encouraged my present Address, in
beseaching your ingenious solution of the Question subseribed, Your gracious
grant whereof will eternally oblige

Most Venerable Sirs, The humblest of your Votaries and Homagers,

Hotspur Roadman.

Question. which is the more Noble Animal, a Louse or a Flea?

Postscript. The first of these generous Animals (not that our Intimacy should
make you partial in your Determination) has been a constant Attendant of my
present Retirement and Studies, and therefore not improperly some part of my
speculations


The nobler Animal a Lowse or a Flea! I profess a knotty point, and requires
elaborate Headpiece-work to answer: And therefore what think you Gentlemen of
two penny worth of cold Tea, alias warm Nantz, by way of preparatory, for
enlivening our fancies, and enlightening our Intellectuals, for the livelier
and sprightlier discussion of so formidable a Question


With all our Hearts. But first by your leave Mr. Stuff what say you to it?


Truly Gentlemen, not to starve a good Cause, I care not if I make it up a
whole Quartern. For good Wits deserve encouragement, and as an old saying I
have heard among you Foecundi Calices, etc. I confess it is at present a saucy
prized Liquor. But hang pinching, I shall find it in the hundred, for Mr Grub
shall repay it in Helicon


There spoke the genius and the Soul of Poetry.


Therefore, Brush, bring a quartern of Mr. Chair-mans best Whetwit.


Presently Sir.


A long quartern sirrah: For Wit and Learning, Weight and Measure go through
the World


Now Gentlemen to the Question, the Nobler Animal -- Look you [Noble] is a high
and honorable Epithete, a word of Altitude, as I may so say. A Man, or indeed
any other sublunary Creature may be styled Noble, in two several senses. First,
in his personal Capacity, and secondly in his Extract and Original. As to the
personal capacity of these 2 Animals proposed in the Question --


Hold Brother, the decision of that point is my Province. As to their personal
capacities this I must say, since Nature either has not furnished these two
Animals with Bulk and Dimension suitable to their extraordinary Figure and
Symmetry, or rather has not furnished our narrow, sighted humane Optics with
sufficient perspicacity to distinguish the extraordinary parts, lineaments and
corporeal accomplishments of the said animals in their due perfection, I have a
little Mathematical Instrument, a small piece of art in my pocket, that has
discovered most prodigious phenomenons in the corporeal qualifications of the
said minute animals: and let me tell you, there is exactly as much difference
between a Louse and a Flea, as between an Elephant and a Rhinoceros


Prodigious indeed.


Nay; I have so accurately surveyed and delineated the Proboscis of the one,
and the Cusp or Horn of the other, both so plain, and indeed so amazing. For
experiment sake, Friend Jerry, have you ever a --


I understand you -- But it is not worth my unbuttoning to furnish you; for we
have seen the Experiment, and are so fully satisfied in that point, that, to
give 'em both their due, we know not to which to assign the superiority, but if
you will come to the second noble qualification, their Extract, a Flea has so
much the fairer Original; a Flea, I assure you, Mr. Chairman, is your own
Cozen German, no less than a Son of Phoebus. What Parent, pray you, but the
bright God of Day to warm that little Infant of the Summers Sun into Life: and
to show you it is an offspring that does not shame its great Descent, what
Activity, what Sprightliness and Vivacity do you find in it; when on the other
side the dull, the phlegmatic, the heavy lumpish Saturnine Louse --


Nay, fair and softly; you run a little too fast. If you are for Genealogies
and Nativity, pray take the great birth of the little Polypus, the Louse, into
your grave consideration. Do you think it is not as high an honor to his Veins
to have the vital warmth of Man for his Parent; that Anima Mundi, or at least
Lord of the World, nay, himself a World; that more than Miscrocosm, Man, for
his Sire


Nay, fair and softly both of you. What is Birth and Extract for a foundation
of true Nobility, when as an inspired Brother of the Quill observed

-- Genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco --
No, Gentlemen, all that has already been said are weak arguments in the Great
Cause depending. Alas, consider, my Learned Friends, that we sit here for more
important work, and sublimer contemplations. You forget sure that the main
Great End of our Debates and Results is the Encouragement of true Religion,
Virtue and Piety; and the suppression of Vanity, Vice and Profaneness. And
perhaps never was a fairer Topic of that kind came before us than in these two
small animals now in controversy. For instance, what is the Flea but apetfect
image or portraict of Prodigality, nay the Prodigal himself, that very
unprovidently, like the Grasshopper, only hops and dances in Summer, and
famishes and starves in Winter. Nay, what is yet a greater blot in his Scutcheon
for (dic quibuscum sis, and dicam quis es) he herds and sociates with Dogs,
when on the contrary, the braver-spirited Louse consorts with Men, and not only
so, but is the perfect Emblem of the provident good Husband; is no Rover, nor
Rambler, but carefully keeps home, will lodge snug in the Collar of a Doublet
(unless disturbed by the hard hand of Philistines) there perform the first
great Commandment, Increase and Multiply, and be the staid and careful Father
of a Family even to the fifth and sixth Generation


Well Brother, you have spoken with the Voice of an Oracle. The Defense of
Religion and Virtue, Morals and Principle as thou observest, are our grand
affair, and accordingly we subscribe to your deep Judgment, The Louse the
nobler animal; besides I could add one mite more into the Scale of the Louse to
out balance his weaker Rival the Flea. The Flea, with submission, is a
perfect. Blood sucker, and lives in open violation of the Mosaie Law


That Is no great matter, we are neither Jews nor Scots to stand upon that
scruple. And now you talk of Blood, for my part no man loves a Black-pudding
better than my self: and truly having named Black-pudding, there is an honest
Tripe-woman, my particular acquaintance, in the Poultty market (I believe you
may see her out of the window) that sells the best in London. Under the Rose,
Gentlemen, I was once a Suitor to a Daughter of hers before I married my Noncon


A Suitor said you to the Tripe woman's Daughter?


Ay, and had like to have carried her, only the silly old woman broke off the
Match. For when we came to the great Matrimonial preliminary the matter of
Money, the penurious stingy old fool was for having me take out her daughters
whole portion in Tripe and Trotters; which substantial household geer, though
Heaven knows I love very well, yet I was for some ready Cole, and could by no
means dispense with all Sowce and no Silver


Now you talk of your Tripe mother that should have been, I have just now laid
out a small parcel of Rhino in some of her own manufacture


Say thou so, honest Provider.


In the very specifical numerical Commodity you have been talking of,
Black-pudding. And now my honest Landlord below is boiling 'em for Dinner. It Is
true I have no great fancy myself for that Heathen Anti-Judaical compound (as
thou call it). But no matter I have bought me a Chitterling for my own
Dinner


But prithee, Landlord, how came thou to love that silly, limber, nerveless
Gut called a Chitterling


Poxon thee! don't ask such an impertinent Queston. Do thou not know he cannot
get his Wife with Child, and what the Devil would you have him love but a
Chitterling


But does his Wife love a Chitterling too.


Mum, not a word of that.


Well, Gentlemen, since our kind Master Mr. Stuff has been so careful a Caterer
for us in Dish of Black-puddings, to show you that we Athenians must improve
all our minutes in pushing on the Great Work, the Cuttivation of Learning; No,
not so much as at the hour of Dinner, lie fallow, I am just now laboring with a
very great thought which I have long teemed withal


Nay Mr. Chairman is in the right, we must not lose so much as our very
sleeping-time without some product or other. For my part I am sure I laid the
whole design of my second Spira in my sleep


How! In thy sleep!


Verily in my sleep. You must know dreaming naturally very of the Devil, that
renowned Prince of the Air, and Lord of Darkness was generously pleased one
night to inspire me in a kind Dream with the whole Hint and Foundation of my
Spira. And truly, not to be ungrateful for favors received, I embraced his
Princely Highnesses kind motion, and the very next morning set pen to paper in
nomine Domini Atheniensis, touched with a Cole from his own Altar, and writ like
a perfect Enthusiast


Nay, now you talk of the sweet reposing softs of sleep for a conceptionary
inspiration, I can assure you I have made use of a much homelier hour; For,
between friends, I have answered many a Poetical Lady's Question in our Mercury
upon my Stool; and every strain I made I tagg'd a Couplet. Nay Gentlemen, my
Muse and I (I can tell you) have both disembogued together


Well but as you were saying, what is this Mercurial Rapsody of yours we are
like to have now at this gaudy dinner of ours


Why, truly I have summed up our whole Society, our Arts and Sciences, and
indeed the whole body of our Athenian Learning in this grand Oleo now before
us, viz. a Black-pudding


I protest, a noble Thought.


It Is true, I once designed it for a loftier Pindarick, but at present take it
in humbler Heroic


Silence in the Court whilst Mr. Chairman delivers.


Assist me some bold Muse, profoundly studying
For the great Compound, an Athenian Pudding.
A large Black-pudding, neither long nor strait,
Oval nor round, but a fair Figure of Eight.
That grand Numerick 8, but justly given
To us great Bards. The old Sages were but Seven.
But by the dint of our Athenian Pen,
We justly write ourselves the Eight Wise Men:

Hum, hum, hum!


Come all our Learned Votaries, to delight you,
Hear to what Entertainment we invite you.
Come taste our Dish, served up in Platter Wooden,
A Dish a Feast, and that great Feast a Pudding.
Our Mercury, Wits noble Medley Treat,
What is it, true Pudding-like, But Sawsage meat?
Wit from the top to bottom, it is well known:
A right true Pudding still, All Meat, no Bone.
Have we Sense, Learning, Wisdom, full and whole:
Still a Black-pudding, stufft with Blood and Soul.
Our Learned labors, Sirs, have all that is good in;
The more Athenian still, a Marrow Pudding.
Marrow indeed our Pudding never lacks;
Unless sometimes the Gut in boiling cracks:
And then the Wit runs out, till poor lank things,
We shrink and dwindle into Chitterlings.
Among the more lofty subjects, fit for volumns,
The daily Arguments that grace our columns;
What if sometimes a Pigmy Question creeps!
So Tom Thumb too in Athens Pudding peeps.
Have we sometimes some merry quaint Device,
Of Joque and Clinch? Our Pudding Herbs and Spice.
May Athens Sons proud Glory he to depart 'em,
Whilst still our mighty work is Pistum Fartum.

I Profess Gentlemen a Festival Banquet, an absolute Bacchanal, In verbo
Sacerdotis -- Helicontensis I would say; I have not carest my self so
sumptuously Heaven knows the good day


Nay troth, as thou say, 'twas a luscious Regale. For my part I fell on so
briskly, and bestirred my Grinders so heartily --


Nay Gentlemen, to do us all right, there was no Love lost on any side; we all
behaved our selves so manfully, and made our Attack so substantially, with our
Loins girt and our Sandals buckled, till we made as clear work as a Jew at a
Passover. And now Gentlemen, a propo! what think you, if for a short pause
after Dinner, not always to be wrapped up in our Athenian altitudes, nor
altogether converse with Sublimities, for once we lay aside our non vacat
Exiguis, and our Majora canamus, and e'ne descend from our Learned Pantheon to
laugh out half an hour in a little humbler chat, and talk like the vulgar


Truly a very good proposal. And what if to make up the mirth, we take our
honest Landlord into the Consort


By all means! Let him be called -- Mr. Poll.


Your pleasure, Gentlemen?


Mr. Chairman gives you leave to sit down with us.


I humbly thank your Honors.


Nay, Mr. Chairman, I suppose you will favor him with leave to be covered too.


With all my hoart: Mr. Poll; we must not bear state always; pray for once make
no Ceremony, but be one of us. It Is true, it is a Grace we must not always
grant; for besides the Dignity of this Honorable Society, even in my own
private capacity, I must tell you Mr. Poll, not to pride my self, I think a Son
of the University ought to be --


Worshipped you mean. There I confess, Brother Grub, you have somewhat the
advantage of me. For a University or a College, Oxonian, Alma Maternian, and
so forth, were never any part of my ambition. Heaven be praised, I can prepare
my Tetrachymagogon without a Velvet Cap or a Tufted Gown; without the servitude
of a Scholars Apprenticeship, or the charge and expense of a learned Livery.
No, Gentlemen, I profess a great deal more good husbandry than that comes to.
For look you, my Masters, as long as there is Post or Pissing-place in either
street, nook or alley, in the whole spacious Town of London, to blazon my
renown upon, it is infinitely less chargable to have my Fame and Learning stand
conspicuous in large black and white, than to walk in Scarlet from the Schools
to St. Mary's Besides, I thank my Stars, I have been as serviceable in the
Bills of Mortality, and have had the hearty prayers of all the Parish Clerks
and Sextons; and all with as able an executing hand, as the proudest Graduate
Professor of 'em all


Nay, there I jump with my Brother Squirt. An University is no part of my
pretension neither. I bless Heaven my very small Literature is of my own
Nursery, a homely plant of my own Kitchen Garden, I assure you. And truly I am
rather proud than ashamed of that Qualification. For mark me Gentlemen, more
Confidence and less Learning makes the Compounds for an Athenian. And possibly
had my foolish Parents, or my own misfortune destined me for an Academian, 'us
ten to one but the University Modesty might have done me more harm than good,
by baulking my Courage, and consequently marring my Preferment, by rendering me
incapable of my present post of Honor


Truly Brother, a very good observation, Modesty is in deed too cold a Glebe
for an Athenian soil. We must have Horse-dung Beds for our brisker and nimbler
productions. Minerva. was the offspring of Jove's brain; and pray was not
Vulcans hard Hand and his harder Hammer called for her Lucina. For my part, I
would not give a farthing for a Headpiece that has not a Forehead answerable
to it. It Is not your Leaves of Brass, those boasted Records of Heroes; but
Fronts of Brass, that must raise our Monuments


Faith thou have hit it. 'Twas just such a Front that writ my Second Spira.


Ay boy, that was a Master stroke. Pray Mr. Stuff how many have you sold of
that glorious Apocrypha


Only some few small Impressions, sum total about 18 thousand. Well, Mr. Dash,
I am not a little obliged to you for that tickling Quivedo, that sweet Vision
of Hell. Prithee what Muse did thou invoke, dear Joachim, for that sublime
Inspiration


Muse quoth a! no troth; those silly shamefaced Girls, the nine blushing Fools,
I assure you were no Gossips at that jolly Christning. No really, if I may tell
you the truth, I was illuminated by a Grubstreet Apollo, whilst the great Souls
of Garagantua, Lazarillo, Captain Jones, St. Jago Pilgrims, etc. were the warm
transmigrating Fires that animated me for the bold Montellon of that Golden
Oracle


Nay, troth that elaborate piece is all pure Elixir Atheniense, the very Spirit
and Quintessence of thy Mercurial SALT. But hang thee, Jo. not to make thee too
proud neither, in my opinion our honest Master, little Jack there, has been the
hardier bold Britain of the two in that courageous publication; and accordingly
deserves the fairer share of the Laurel for it. For look you; Jo. thy part in
it was no more, than we brothers of the Quill, by virtue of that great branch
of the Poet and Painters Charter, Quidlibet audendi, may pretend some little
Excuse for. Besides Gentlemen, do not we write Athenians, and pray is not
Athens a fair Town of (let me see) some 2 thousand miles distance from little
old England


Such a way bit, Mr. Grub.


Tar-box, we write Travelers too; and consequently, by the known right and
property of Travelers; may very lawfully --


Do what?


Lie by authority; and there is an end on it.


Sweet Sir, I am your most obliged humble Servant.


But for our friend and Patron Jack: What buffets has he stood in defending,
and what toil and fatigue has he undergone in vouching and legitimatizing that
spurious brat? For example, how many motherly Matrons (the pious chap women for
that golden piece, that aurum fulminans, for the blowing up and confounding the
Atheistical Gogs and Magogs) has he had to tickle and chuckle into an implicit
Faith for the swallowing of that pious Legerdemain. Nay, and what is harder yet,
how many Crape gown Visitants, those more learned and more formidable
Curioso's, has he had to satisfy in the undoubted veracity of that prodigious
Ens Metaphysicum


Nay hold a Little Gentlemen, pray give me leave to be my own Trumpet in this
cause, as best able to sing my own Glorys in that Triumphant Subject, I assure
you, Gentlemen to all the Several Thousand Inquisitors upon that Question (for
'twas half the work of my shop to answer them) tho I say it my self, I have
stood the Brunt with that presense of mind, that Courage and Constancy enough
to dub me a Hero. You know I have a Languid sort of Countenance, and what with
a grave face, and the manage of a Sanctified Grimace, I have replied so
demurely, turned up white of Eyes so devoutly, and protest so sincerely, that
really I have rarely or never met that severest e'ne Infidel Curiosity, that I
have not softened and sweetn'd into some sort of a Conversion. But Mr. Dash, I
am the best Bookseller for such an Author, for you must know I have a
particular Talent that way. It Is no new thing to me I assure you. Time has been
that I have had the Confidence (the modest assurance I would say) of as bold an
undertaking before


No doubt on it Mr. Stuff, Nor am I insensible of your Virtues of that kind. For
truly between frinds the knowledge I had of my Publishers merits that way was
possibly my greatest Encouragement for the work. Under the Rose, I had never
labored with that Stupendous Birth, had I not been well assured of so able a
Nursing hand to rear it


There you did me Right. And Indeed you had sufficient reason for that
assurance in me. For as it is notoriously known, that I have published some
posthumous Pieces even of my own dear Daddys writing and composing under my own
name; as my own legitimate and particular Production and Offspring: and robbed
the very dead for no other Feather then the Titular Author to grace the
Booksellers Scutcheon. After so current a Slur upon the world for mere vanity
sake, it is hard, if in so much greater and weightier an Importance as the
profit and Interest of so Selling a Copy as Spira, I could not strain a little
Extraordinary point of modesty for so potent a Consideration


By your Leave Gentlemen, shall I make bold to thrust in a word?


with all my heart honest Landlord, I think thou have not spoke yet.


Then truly Mr. Stuff, if you have had the happiness of Sweetning and Softening
so many thousand Infidels into a Belief of your Spira, you have had better luck
then I upon that Subject


Thou! Landlord.


Yes I Sir. For my part I ventured once and but once to try my little Rhetoric
for making a Convert of one of those Infidells, and I declare I had like to
have had my head broke for it


Why honow Landord: were thou a Champion for my Spira?


Yes troth a piece of one, and much I got by it. For the other day there came a
gentleman to drink a dish with me, and falling (...) fowl upon your Spira, I in
good Reason, as I thought, began a little to rebuke him for traducing and
Scandalising so Authentic and Substantial an Oracle as the History of the
second Spira. Hereupon besides a hundred Impudents and Rascals he called me
for Justifying so notorious a piece of villainy (nay if he had been in mad Nantz
as he was only in sober Coffee I believe he had knocked me down,) he was
pleased to utter such hideous hard words against the Author and Publisher of
it, as made me tremble to hear him. If you think Mr. Dash you can bear the
hearing of them, I have a pretty good memory, and believe could repeat them
verbatim


Hear them Landlord? Ay with all my heart. And as to the Bearing I have as much
of that part of the great Cardinal Fortitude as the whole nine Worthys


With your permission then First in plain English he Swore the Pamphlet or
fable of the Second Spira was the most notorious lie and forgery that ever
looked light in the face


A very fair Beginning.


Nay, and you will have as fair an End ont too. To proceed then he did not (he
said) so much quarrel at the Impudence and Knavery of the Romance it self, as
being no doubt a Badge of the Authors profession, but at the nonsense and
Stupidity of the dull Rogue for putting his Lies so Sillily and foolishly
together


That indeed was a Shrewd blot.


For, (continued he) how do they patch up the credit of this Mormo? O yes? very
substantially. For 1st. a politic Advertisment at the End of the Book and in
half a dozen Mercuries besides, gives us to understand that the worthy and
reverend Divine from whose hand the Athenian compiler had his notes and minutes
to work upon, had unluckily taken a Religious Ramble into the Country (a blind
Journey I suppose to the D's Ar -- of Peake) and thereby was unfortunately non
present for the necessary Vindication of the Sacred Truths in that History to
confront the Scruples and Calumnys against it


So Sir, go on.


2ly. What was the greatest obstruction to a full Discovery, 'twas insinuated
that the unhappy Gentleman the Subject of that Tragical Relation, was a person
of high Quality, and therefore his honorable Parents used their best
Injunctions to hush his name as a reflection upon their noble Family to have
such an Apostate member dye out of it


Very well. And pray what could this Satyricall Guest of yours object against
these two Insinuations, as he is pleased to call 'em


Why truly even enough to lay you flat on your Back. To the first, says, he,
was ever such a blockhead as this thick scull'd Athenian, to feign so
ridiculous a Story as the black robed Gentleman's Absence in the Country to the
unfortunate stifling their Spira's Veracity; when besider that single attesting
Dr. the Book mentions that no less (...) then four professors of Divinity had
the ghostly Care of this poor Gentleman on his Death bed; and pray were the
other all gone into the Country too, that not one single Champion of 'em all
could step forth, though in so important a Cause, so necessary a Testimonial for
the Service of his Religion and Alters. Ay but his Parants forsooth had bound
'em to Silence. Very pretty Injunction, when the bare trivial Request of a
Scrupulous Parent (for that was the Parents utmost power) could be of force
sufficient to supersede the higher obligations of Conscience and Christianity
in four Orthodox (or indeed suppose but one single one) professors of Religion
and Preachers of the Gospel, to be so much Traitors to their God (for that is
their best name) that not one of 'em from that day to this has so much as
opened his mouth, (nay and that too in so Athesticall an Age) to the attesting
that single short narrative of this anonimous Spira's dreadful Example, though
possibly to a much greater Service to their Church then the whole Pulpit work
of half an Age


A very Severe Observator.


And as to the Parents wonderful tenderness of their Families Credit in this
Severe Injunction upon the silenced Divines, truly neither Barrel better
herring, if we can suppose such honorable Christian Parents so concerned for
the Reputation of one disolute Son, one mortyfied Branch of their whole stock,
as to do so public an injury to the whole Christian Proffession in so
Barbarous a Tongue-tye; this I may safely say of 'em. they are neither half the
Christians nor had half the Charity upon Earth as Dives had in Hell; for he
good man, comparatively so called, was for making his own dreadful Example of
Eternal Vengeance, if possible, a Sea-mark to his Brethren upon Earth, by
sending Messengers to them to warn 'em from spliting on his Rock, and being
Swallowed in his Gulf; which if you will believe the Athenians, was no part of
this Noble Familys Consideration. Let a thousand Athesticall Renegadoes dye and
be damned (which possibly this only Example openly and faithfully transmitted
to Posterity might have converted) provided that this single Apostate Child of
theirs may sleep in his grave with a noli me tangere, only for the pleasure of
keeping his Ashes unprofaned, in compliment forsooth to his honorable Pedigree


And was this all he had to say?


Only a short farewell Conclusion, which was that you ought to fall upon your
Knees (only he thought praying was no part of your Studies) and thank Heaven
and a merciful Government that you have not had a fair lash from Newgate to
Tyburn for so impudent an Imposture shamm'd upon the world under a License and
Imprimatur, enough to put Religion it self out of Countenance, as if it wanted
such Authorized Cheats and lies to appear in public with a cum privilegio as a
Crutch to support it


Enough Enough good Landord. The Gentleman was a little too Satyricall. And
truly thou have made a sort of an ungrateful Titillation in some tingling
Organs about me, that I vow I care for hearing no more. Not that I am troubled
with any such green sickness Virgin Grace as Blushing, no I thank my
Constitution I have a tougher Skin; and defy the utmost the snarling world can
say against me. For Landlord I may tell you as a Friend, that Truth and
Honesty, Religion or Conscience are no Athenian Arguments, we write for the
penny, and there is an Answer for all


Well Gentlemen, what if we Change this melancholy Subject and talk of a little
merrier Country matters


What of our Wives?


Ay no better Subject.


Nay Gentlemen if you talk of wives, I have that to say to my Wife --


Nay I fancy thou have much to say to her, but I believe thou do little
enough in Conscience, by a very sad token we have so little fruits of thy
Labor


Not so neither Mr. Squirt. I can assure you there is no good will wanting of my
side


Nor of hers I Will swear for her.


It Is true the Blessing of Children and raising of seed --


With the small Corn in thy Bushel --


Is not every woman's happiness.


Not every man's Ability --


Not that the Blessing of Children is the only consideration, for besides that,
there is a certain pride and credit in being a Father, and that little sort of
Honor in a fireside, that truly I am in no small Affliction from my shame and
Reproach under the Infelicity of that want. Nay what with the Jeers of my
fleering neighbors abroad --


And thy Curtain Lectures for nonperformance at home


Together with my want of an Heir to my Copys ( viz. to my Fee simple in ten
Volumes of Mercuries, and the twice ten more you will write me) I labor under no
little trouble of mind


Nay really Mr. Stuff all these are sensible Afflictions especially the last
mortifying Thought, the want of an Heir to thy Mercurial Volumes, Treasures,
let me tell you, as precious as Purcelaine, that may lie by to thy great great
grandchildren a Hundred years hence


Nay besides all this a Childless Citizen looks so Bankrupt like, so forlorn a
wretch, that poor trader in Love, as if he had neither City stock of his own,
nor Court credit to supply him


Look you Brother Dash, neither your Mathematics nor Mr. Squirt's Philosophy
has yet hit of the true Cause of Mr. Stuffs malady and Distemper


Malady and Distemper, said you?


Ay, distemper old Boy downright natural Infirmity. But if thou wilt follow my
Direction, I Will help thee to a Recipe better then all his Tetrachymagogon, a
Cure that shall mend all thy faults and make thee a Dad immediately


Mend my faults and make me a dad? I vow Mr. Grub you will do me the greatest
kindness in the whole world, and you shall never know what I Will do for you if
you will oblige me with this dear Recipe


Well then to make it pass the sweeter
E'ne take it as it runs in Meeter.
Thou want indeed -- (I know thou do)
A Son and Heir -- (and it is but just)
An Heir on whom, (Born to Inherit,
If possible, a treble Spirit,)
When Our High- Holbourn Chariots call,
May our Athenian Mantle fall.
But why is this great Heir ungot:
All thy own foolish fault; God wot.
You Are, in plain English, Honest Laddy,
Too much a sloven for a Daddy.
To longing Spouse what is more uneasy
Then to consummate Gross and Greasy.
Nothing like spruce and gay and gallant,
Best tickles the Conceiving Talent.
Reform then Jack; and pick up, go
Powder and prink thy self a Bean.
Then with Drums beating, Colors flying,
No savor, but clear Stage, defying
The world in Martial Order gradicall
March on, nor doubt thy strength nor Radical.
With all thy Forces in Battalia
Push on into Loves bold Pharsalia.
Fear not thy prowess, my sweet Friend,
But honestly at nine Months End
Expect thy Valors Trophys, Cradles
Nurse, sucking Bottles, Possets, Cawdles;
And Chatting Gossips blithe and Hilary
With all their Mouth guns and Artillery.
But if some croaking Bird of Night
Both Flesh and Devil owe thee a spite
And thy own poor Domestic scantling
Is not enough to raise a Bantling,

WELL Mr. Stuff have you consulted your pillow, and resolved upon my Poetical
Instuctions and measures for carrying on the great work of Propagation


why really Mr. Grub I have ruminated and pondered upon your Learned Advise in
that Conjugall Importance


Well; how and how then? can you say with our old friend Catiline.

It is Decreed nor shall thy Fate Oh Rome --


It Is so far decreed that all the necessary Preliminaries are already Settled.
For Instance I have not only been treating with the Broom man and Kitchen
stuff-maid, those necessary small Merchants for the disposal of my old
Wardrop; but I have likewise consulted the ablest Cucumber Oracle my Neighbor
Sheerman, and Mrs. Topping and Mrs. Commode, the Tailor Semstress and Milliner
in the Caball the whole Fraternity and Sisterhood of Beau-makers, for my
personal Equipment and Imbellishments


Nay then my dear Disciple, I see my good Doctrine has not been thrown away
upon thee


Nor is this all my Preparatory. For after I have new Cased my self, new rig'd
and tackled my outward Furniture, I am resolved to take a little pains and lay
out some Cost upon the Hulk it self; and therefore design to go t'the Hummums


The Hummums! I vow that is taking pains upon thy Hulk indeed, the sweetest way
of Careening a fowl vessel


Nay Gentlemen I intend to go through stich with it; To be Cupt and re-cupt,
rubbed up and rubbed down, bathed and balm'd, fumed and fumigated, hum'd and
double humm'd, my Masters, till I put Spirit and Elixir into me; And then --


And then indeed old Boy. Nay thou take the right Method for it: and if after
all this trimming and sweetning thou do not slip into thy dear Spouses
Titillations, and tickle her up a little Bantling, we must then conclude thy
Disease is Desperate, and nothing but the last Application will perform the
Cure


The last application? Borowing help to inoculate my Crab I suppose you mean:
Nay as you say, if all the rest of your prescription will not Effectually
operate, I must be forced to submit, and e'ne dispense with that last unsavory
Dose of Horn Jelly, the Inoculation you speak of, rather then want a Son and
Heir


Nay' there thou are in the right on it. For not to be frighted at a hard name, a
little common Popular Obloquy, a mere vulgar Error in that point, I remember an
old Bard once sweetly Sung

The Trips of Wives how does the World mistake in?
The only Injury in Cuckold-making
Is where the unbidden too bold Guests Carouse,
Without By'r leave Good Landlord of the House.
But helping Friend upon a good Ocasion
Is only Invitation not Invasion.

I profess a sweet Distinction!


Besides there is that Reproach and shame of Life,
In Childless Husband and unteeming Wife,
That to have that Flaw in Reputation stopped,
Nor Families fall for want of being propt,
What we cannot raise it is prudent to adopt.

Nay sweet Mr. Grub you speak such profound Reason, that I stand the most
convinced and most confirmed Convert in the whole world; and cant forbear
answering you in a small Rhyme of my own Composition

Oh the Sweet Joys
Of Girls and Boys!
If my wives Parsly-bed, I thought could breed 'em!
I Swear by Athens Owls and my own Raven,
I Would give her Conscience Latitude and Freedom
To borrow Cock of Game to help her Craven.

By your sweet Leave Sirs, I come from a very honest Gentleman, who desires to
Communicate some small Affairs to your Honorable Society


An honest Gentleman say you.


Ay, and a learned one too. A man of Sense as well as Honor.


Say you so* I Will soon try that. Pray does this Learned Gentleman read our
Mercurys


Ay, and admire 'em too.


Enough Enough, I need no other proofs of his Learning. His Sense and Parts are
unquestionable. For as our Brother Bays says of his Play, So we make our
Mercury our Touchstone: He that is our Athenian Admirer, gives a sufficient
Indication of all the accomplishments both of a Philosopher and a Virtuoso, and
Ingenuity needs no fairer a Test


Nay, if that can accomplish him for an Ingenioso, he is not only your Admirer
but your Champion too


Our Champion! worthy Sir?


Yes Sir you will find him in the first Column of your Mercury of the 9th. of May
last, throwing down a small gauntlet of his in your quarrel by way of
Challenge to an impudent anonymous Adversary of yours


Oh, I remember that Honorable Friend of ours, subscribed T. W. that sent us
the kind Letter in Vindication of a small Couplet of mine in one of our
Mercurys, against an Attacque of Envy and Ignorance, under the Imputation and
Charge of Blasphemy


I think I Remember the Distick, speaking of the Wind.

Man knows not whence it comes nor where it goes.
If he that sends it knows, he only knows.

Ay, and some overwise snarlers forsooth, were pleased to Criticize upon that
last line as no less then a Blasphemous Reflection upon Gods Omniscience, as if
he could be Ignorant of a common Natural Cause and Effect


But my good Friend (not that your greater Abillties wanted so poor an
Advocate) I hope, did you right Gentlemen


O beyond all Expression. For my part I cannot but remember his learned
Arguments even with a sort of Veneration. How does he lay our feeble Adversarys
upon their Backs? as if every Hypotheticall Expression (as they foolishly
suggest Heaven help their weakness) must imply a Negative. Well but that worthy
Gentleman has produced such Arguments and cited such Authority to clear that
point as nothing could make a more generous Defense for us, nor more
substantial Justification

For Instance,

Si Deus est animus nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi precipue sit pura mente colendus.
As if says he either the supposed Heathen Author Cato, or rather the true
Christian Author Franciscus de Sta. Clara could be guilty of doubting wheither
God was a Spirit or no

And in another Instance,

Frigida si sit Hyems cur aquae fumant hyemales. As if (continues he) that
Famous and memorable Author and Physician Johannes Nubrigensis so renoun'd in
the Reign of Richard the 2d could doubt wheither winter was cold or no; because
forsooth thus Hypothetically expressed


But pray Gentlemen by the by are you of my Friends Opinion that Franciscus de
Sta. Clara an eminent Christian Monck, in the 12th. Century, was the true
Author of those disticks commonly called Sententiae Pueriles, and not the
reputed Heathen Moralist Cato


Ay no doubt on it: I could have resolved you that twice seven Years ago. For
those Famous Authors your friend quotes for his Authority viz. Joachim
Crinitus, Mr. Ashmole etc. the one that asserts it in his Dissertationes de
Crit. fid. Christ. and the other in his Chymia Sacra, are both of 'em writers
of unquestioned Veracity, and both my particular Closet Friends and
Acquaintance


Then you have read both those Authors?


through and through, pith and marrow, nerve and sinew; as for Joachimus I Will
say that for him, I do not believe that there is ever a school casuist of 'em
all mootes Points of Conscience like him. Between Friends, I have accommodated
my self with many an Answer to some knotty points of Religion in several of our
Mercurys, from that very Author. No disparagement, I hope Sir, to borrow from
the Learned


O, fie Sir, disparagement! rather your Glory, Sir, to have that Honorable
trust and familiarity with the Keys and Cabinets of such venerable Antiquity


As for Mr. Ashmole, that more modern English Pen, I am of opinion that nothing
has made so Elaborate an Extraction of the quintessence and spirit of Divinity
as his Chymia Sacra have done


Nay now you talk of Your Two learned Mephistophilos and Familiars, pray let me
thrust in one word of my particular Closet-Mate and Croney too, the worthy
Joannes Nubrigensis, I assure you Sir I have so much Reason to be deep in his
Books, that I can vouch that for the Honor of old Richard the 2d's days, that
that very Esculapius of never dying Memory, was the Original Founder of my
Tetrachymagogon. Not but I have built and improved upon his Basis. And not but
a young Cook may add one corn of salt, and one grain of spice to an old
standing Pie, But in short the Original Dish is all his own, and possibly it is
no small feather in my Cap that the Care and Industry of my Ancestors, have
preserved that golden Arcanum hallowed and inviolable for so many successive
Ages, and lodged it wholly and solely in my hands


Lord, what Universal Learning must You Athenians have; such prodigious
deep-read Men, that no Art nor Mystery, Depth nor Shallow, Writer or Author
comes amiss to you


Nay Sir, that we must say for our Society, that we are (take us together) the
whole Bodlaean of Learning, Universal, as you well observe, being the very
Crest of our Scutcheon. Or what would our undertaking signify else


Well Gentlemen but after all your wondrous Universality, what if this
Joachimus and this Ashmole and this Nubrigensis, should be as errant Romance as
Tom Thumb in Folio, neither any such Men nor any such Authors in the whole
Universe, a mere non ens, no such thing as his Dissertationes, nor tothers
Chymia in Rerum natura


How! what is that you say?


Nothing but dounright Truth honest Grub of Grub-street-hall, and so the honest
Gentleman, that sent you that Vindication, prayed me to tell you


Abused, bantered, and ridiculed!


Ene so. Neither better nor worse. As for the poor Heathen Philospher Cato, we
must do him Justice and unchristen his Disticks and e'ne restore them to their
true Daddy; and your 12th. Century man de Sta. Clara modestly draw of,
notwithstanding the unquestioned Veracity of your intimate Closet Friends and
Acquaintance, sweet Mr. Grub. It Is true, as to little Jeryes old Croney honest
Johannes Nubrigensis alias Jack of Newbery: That famous Esculapius, might
undoubtedly be the true Founder of his Tetrachymagogon, if I mistake not, it
being a Receipt of an old Granneys, one of Jacks Newbery spinsters, found in a
corner of an old Cupboard of the reverend Gentlemomans, together with an old
Ruff and an Aquae-Vitae bottle, and some other venerable Relics of Antiquity


Well! pray Sir go on.


Nay if you like it, you're heartily welcome to it.


And so, Sir -- as you were saying. --


Why Sirs, if those Bodlean Head-peices of Yours, your deep Athenian
Universality, instead of your Boasted Antiquity-Wisdom, had had Learning enough
to have read but the History of Yesterday, you might have learnt that the
famous Franciscus de Sta. Clara, instead of a 12th. Century man was a late
Somerset house Brother, a modern Babylonish Controversy Scribler (posibly
living to this day,) and answered by Dr. Stillingfleet. But pardon the
notorious grossness of the Banter, my kind Friend your generous Vindicator,
knew the depth of your Athenian swallow and digestion, and therefore not
suspecting any danger of a Discovery, he prepared his sham accordingly


Then belike all that Gentleman's Vindication in clearing our Aspersion of
Blasphemy, both his Authors and Quotations were all a downright Ridicule upon
us


Yea verily Reverend Mr. Chairman.


And we have returned him that grateful and pubick Acknowledgment for just
nothing


Even so Mr. Squirt. For had you had but three grains of your own
Tetrachymagogon in your head, you might easily have perceived that all his
pretended Arguments in your defense only burlesqued upon you. For what Analogy
is there between your Hypotheticall [If] and Cato's

Si Deus est Animus. Is there an absolute Affirmative? and might as well have
been Vt Deus est animus: As God is a Spirit he ought to be worshipped, etc. And
so Frigida si sit Hyems might have been Frigida cum sit Hyems. Since winter is
cold, etc. But your [If] in the Devils name

If God that sends it knows, he only knows, is a gross a Reflection upon Gods
Omniscience, as that Vindication is upon your Athenian Ignorance. And this my
worthy Friend Commissioned me to to tell you, and so fare ye well most Learned
Sons of Athens


Nay stay a little Sir one word before you go Death; if he carries it off thus
we are undone. [


Nay never was such a slur put upon us; that is certain.


Let me alone to bring it off again. You shall see aside. Well Sir you have
trolld it on at a high rate. You think you have smitten us hip and Thigh, I
warrant you


Only some small Trophy Sir not much worth our Boasting.


Not much worth it indeed. For to give the Gentleman our sham Friend and the
whole world satisfaction in this matter, and clear our Society from the
grinning Triumph you think you have got on us, you shall hear the whole Case
examined and stated, and our whole wounded Reputation as fairly salved and
repaired to the utter Confusion of all our laughing Enemies


Say you so Sir?


Pray Brother Squirt who writ that Mercury of the 9th. of May?


E'ne your own sweet self Mr. Grub. For for my part I had no hand in it, for I
happened at that time to be some miles out of Town upon a very important
medicinal Operation, no less then attending a Patient of Quality, being indeed
sent for in a Coach and Four, to cure an old Lady of the Piles


Nay and I had no hand in it neither, for I happened too to be called aside as
far as Hounslow upon a very considerable Mathematick Affair no less then
surveying a Turnip Field and a Crab-tree Orchard


Do you hear this Sir.


Ay Sir and what then?


Only mark the winding up of the Bottom. So in fine Brother Athenians I my
single individual self was left in Town and consequently my own numericall pen
writ and Composed that particular Mercury


Only your own single Minerva I assure you.


Look you there Sir -- pray what may I call your name?


Ned Freeman.


Then Mr. Freeman did not I tell you I should clear our Athenian Reputation,
and can any thing to our immortally righted Honor be made out plainer. Was not
that Mercury a pure By-brat of mine? Was it compiled any otherwise then raptim
as I may so say? Was it concerted or discussed in a full Athenian Consistory?
No Sir, 'twas only a private ship of my own. And as such, the whole Society
stands fair and unblemisht. For look you Sir we pretend not to Infallibility Ex
Cathedra. As men or so, in our several private Capacityes we may have our
oversights and Faylings; but as the whole Body of Athenians, in full Sanedrim,
in General Council assembled, we defy the whole world to overreach us, or less
then Divinity and Oracle to slip from us


Gadamercy old Grub.


Pray Sir you may e'ne return as wise as you came, and pray bid your Friend
your dear Sir Poll make the best of his Joachimus and his Nubrigensis, for any
hurt he or they can do us, and so pray give him our Societies hearty humble
service; and so we kiss your fair hand


Nay Grub, thou have won it fairly now. I shall return as you say as wise as I
came, and leave your Athenian Reverences no wiser then I found you

Oh sons of Athens what you want in sense,
How nobly you make up --

In Impudence. You see we understand you both in prose and Verse, and to answer
you in another farewell Rhyme of mine

Think not the world shall Grubs bold Genius fright,
Athens will write; not all our Foes Proud spite
Shall ever check our great Herculean Labors;
But we'll drive on Eternal paper daubers.

Well Brother Grub, thou have carried it off with a high hand, and bore up very
magisterially. But for all this our Society was never so ruffled before


Joachimus and Nubrigensis! a pox of our Universality? I declare we were never
so Flounder'd in all our lives


Pshaw! many such a dry Bob must we expect, if we write Mercury's. But hang it,
I am for copying my Friend Maximin

Laugh and divert it with some other Thought.
But let our Fleering Adversarys make their best on it
At least it will be but a poor Nine-days wonder,
To catch us Tripping in one blind-side Blunder.

Gentlemen here, s Dorothy Tickleteat the Islinghton Milkmaid presents her
humble service to you, and desires your Acceptance of a Dish of Cream, and
withal beseeches the favor of a word with your Honors


Oh by all means admit her.


Ay Landlord pray hand her in civily.


A dish of Cream! I profess a Right Noble Patroness, and the least we can do,
is to dedicate our next Volume of Mercurys to her


Madam Dorothy --


Madam Dorothy! Indeed Sir that is too much, plain Mrs. Dorothy will serve my
turn


Then dear Mrs. Dorothy, we are all extremely obliged to your pretty sweetness
for this extraordinary Favor


Nay I vow Sir, you make me blush.


And the whole Society must acknowledge your Generous Noble present.


Only a few Strokings; but and shall please you, it is all Red-Cows. But indeed
I am a great deal more in your Debt then this comes to, and that you shall know
May Day next when my veiles comes in


Oh fie Mrs. Dorothy, let us deserve this favor first.


Deserve it! By my troth that you have done double and treble long ago: For
really Gentlemen you have answered my Question so Scholard like, and I have
taken your Advise and use'd a black-lead Comb ever since. It Is true if I go out
a little too early in the morning the Dew is so apt to wash it off again; but no
matter, when I dress in my Top knot of a Sunddy, I make my self as fair a Brown
Foretop as ever a girl in the Parish


Sweet Mrs. Dorothy, we are very happy and no less proud to serve you. But
indeed it is the Business and study of this honorable Society to oblige all
mankind. Only the World is a little ungrateful and does not reward us as we
deserve


Lord what pity that is.


No Mrs. Dorothy, we have not such generous Masters and Mistresses as Mrs.
Dorothy Tickleteat every day. Such favors are not common Blessings as the hard
world goes


Nay Sirs I scorn to forget my Friends I have received a great deal of Comfort
from you; for by following your Learned Advise and mending some small faults in
my Complexion, in grace of God I have got me a good Husband; for this day
Sevennight I am to be Married


Nay, that is a happyness indeed.


But truly Gentlemen I have one unhappy Infirmity more and if that be'nt mended
too, I cannot tell what shift in the world to make. I vow it is enough to spoil
my wedlock


Is there any thing in our power to help you, sweet Mrs. Dorothy?


Lord Sir, what is it is not in your power? Oh Gentlemen do me but this one
kindness more, and I am a made woman for ever


Oh sweet Mrs. use us, and command us.


I vow you are so strangely obliging. --


But come, what is this other Infirmity?


I protest Gentlemen it is such a paw thing, and I am so ashamed to tell you.


Hang modesty, you must never be bashful before us. You must throw open your
secrets to your physicians as you would your Arms to your Sweetheart, there is
no health to be got without one, any more then Love without the other


But I vow Sir I shall so blush --


What within a week of matrimony and blush still; oh fie. Come pluck a good
heart up and out with it


Well if you will let me whisper Mr. Squirt in the ear, he is a piece of a man
midwife, I think I saw him at Joan Dirtypugs Labor; and I dare venture to tell
him


With all my heart.


Well, would we had done with her once, for I long to be at her Cream pot.


Well Brother how do you find her Question?


Why Radical, Brother. In plain English; an over Affluence of Humidity. She Is
troubled with a Lax in her Aquaeduct, a want of Retention in her Vretors


Lord what a sweet thing is Learning.


And is this all your Grievance? never fear Mrs. we'll cure you, my Life for
yours


Will you indeed sweet Sir -- I protest 'twill be the greatest piece of Charity
that ever you did a poor Virgin in your whole Life. Alas Sir it comes sometimes
upon me so violently both sleeping and waking; and if I should lie by the side
of a man with it, twere enough to lose his Affections for ever, and make me the
miserablest Creature living. Besides it has been so melancholy a thought to me
to have a good thing so spoyld --


Well, Child, thou shall take some of my Tetrachymagogon, 'twill cost thee but
half a Crown a Bottle --


Oh Sir I Will spare no cost.


And with some other Restringents I Will help thee to, I Will turn the Tide I Will
warrant thee


Stop all Leaks, Girl.


And be sure to make me --


As close as a Corkt Bottle, Child --


And lie all the live long Night --


Seven and Seven Years, Chicken --


A cleanly tyte Bed fellow.


As a sucking pullet, dear fubby --


Well I vow Gentlemen you are the sweetest Society in Kent or Christendom. But
pray Mr. Doctor, where do you dwell, that I may call upon you for all these
fine things with the hard names


At the sign of the Glyster pipe.


What, in Ticklehole Alley. And pray when will you be at home?


Within this half hour, Child.


Well, I Will certainly wait upon you. In the mean while pray accept of a quart
of Strawberryes to your Cream --


O fie Mrs. Dorothy --


Nay I vow Sir but you shall. [ forces a shilling into his hand. and so for one
little short, long half hour dear Dr. farewell


What Strawberryes to our Cream too. This is good fortune indeed. But Mr.
Squirt, you have killed two Birds with one stone; answered a question and got a
patient too


Ay, Brother, and a good shift too. These by-Jobs are the best of our Game, I
am sure the Society would hardly buy us porridge without it


Nay my Brother Squirt's in the right for that. Do you think I have answered so
many Rhiming Love Questions in our Mercurys for the mere Letchery of Poetry, or
the Lucre of the poor penny Mr. Stuff can afford me for 'em? No, faith I have a
deeper reach in my Athenian Politics. For let me tell you it is not less then
twenty (and twenty to that) kind Couples that I have Exercised my Sacerdotall
Function on, upon no other Recommendation then my being so true a Love
Advocate, and so good a Friend to the Mathematics, and got good Yellow Boys,
and good Sack Possets into the Bargain


But I vow I was mightily pleased with my Brother Squirt for tickling up dear
Dorothy so sweetly, and hitting her humor so to a hair


Oh that we mush all do if we hope to thrive in this world. I would not give a
Groat for him that cannot tickle all fancies. For Instance when I Courted my Non
Cons Daughter, do you think I came to her in my terrible Tantivy Gown, with a
pair of dreadful Pudding Sleeves, and attacqu'd her in high flown Orthodox?
Death! that had been enough to have frighted the whole family. No no Sir, I
prudently and wisely uncased, came in querpo, and wooed and wedded her de
froque


Oh Gentlemen Treason, Treason, Treason!


Ha! what is the matter man?


Plot and Conspiracy! Gentlemen. A parcel of rude Roysters not having the fear
of Helicon before their eyes, but in open Rebellion against your Athenian
Throne and Dignity, are breaking in upon us Vi et Armis, Gentlemen


Moustrum Horrendum!


Where are these doughty wit Jobbers; these high and mighty Mercury foysters!


Oh Gentlemen, have a care what you do. If you offer any Violence here, we'll
have you Indicted for Sacrilege and Murder, for committing Burglary upon the
Pantheon of Apollo, and the wicked and wilful Effusion of humane Learning


Ay Gentlemen, downright Felons and Murderers.


Fellons and Murderers, Mr. Close stool raker? No, Sirrah, Beadles and
Scavingers, for taking up of Strays and Vagrants, and sweeping out the Rubbish
of the Nation. And so march coundrells, troop Vermin


You Would best to have a care what you do. I Will stand by my Athenians as far as a
Thousand Pound goes. For I Would have you to know I am a Citizen and Livery man of
--


Horne-fair and Cuckolds-Haven, Coxcomb.


O Gentlemen, we are the Sons of Helicon.


Sons of Paddington?


The Flowr of Athens and Greece.


Of Gosselins and Geese --


Apollo, Minerva, Mercury -- Help, help, help.


Well e'ne farewell the Helicon water Rats,
Adieu at once the Daddyes and the Bratts.
And now of Athens too long Persecution
Let Us hope to see that hearty Dissolution,
An End of tiresome Ribbaldryes long sorrow;
And have a Reign of English sense to morrow.


