Tattered, and Poor my habiliaments do show it,
I represent a sad desponding Poet:
Humble, and meek before the Play is over,
Which if you like he is Sancyer than your Whore;
If not the Scribler fretts, looks grum, and Swears,
The Town are Fools, or lays it on the Players.
His Duns to whom he has given bills of Payment,
For Perrywig, Clean-linnen, and spruce Raiment,
Come worrying of him all on the third day:
(for Poets near that time are allways gay)
He cries, come Gentlemen you will see the Play;
Puts 'em in the Pit, and then he slips away:
Now though no Poet, I am much in debt,
And come to make a gathering in the Pit:
Your favour's all; I don't pretend to Wit.
You have been kind to most of our young Actors,
To their dull Plays proved noble Benefactors;
The times are hard, and I Am so plain in dressing,
I Have much ado to save my self from Pressing.
And faith Comedians are as awkard fighters,
As Stiff-neck'd Ogling Beaux, or Lampoon-writers.
War is as great a Curse on our Profession,
As fear which breeds in dying men Confession;
Or Virtue in a dam'sel near Possession.
Now all I beg of you is, that you would have
Commiseration upon harmless Cave,
Who always acts the Fool, -- but is no Knave.
The Profits of this Play to me are given,
As the Song says to make my Wine-scores even,
And not leave things at Sixes and at Seven
For Clarret which the Senate did desire
With fuel should be lowered, is raised much higher;
We Are doubly starved for want of wine, and fire,
And like my part in Epsom-Wells the Justice,
Gadzooks in English all my only trust is,


BLess you Sir; May you ever have a sound Wench, pleasing Dreams, and wholesome
Wine


How much is it? what is it boy?


A Coach-wheel you Sons of Whores; sufficient, if managed to the best
advantage, in Nappy Ale, to give us Courage enough to Hector an Alderman, beat
a Common-Council-Man; and make us reel home like men of Business, and Watchmen
of the better sort


Ounds and Taradiddle.


O brave Cousin Sir John I swear, O brave Cousin Sir John I say -- I would not
for twenty Guinea's but I had rambl'd with you to Night. How do you like me now
Cousin Sir John


Crown me, ye Noble Hero's of the Night, ye Sons of darkness, Crown me, who now
return in triumph from Conquering those Infernal Guards


Drink about there, six in a hand. My head swims.


Hold Coachman, hold you Son of a Whore, I Will not give you one farthing if you
drive a step further, help me out you dog, and get me a Whore; here is half a
Crown for you


By my Shoul dish ish brave shport now; I did never see a Hogshead speak in
Ireland -- by shaint Lukes faith but I will shtop thy bunghole joy


Well Couz. how like you our sport? Are not these delights incomparably beyond
the dull insipid pleasures of a Country-Coxcomb's life; whose diversion is his
toil, and cannot give him the distinguishing Character of a Gentleman


Uds foot, you're in the right on it, Cousen Sir John.


There after your filthy beastly sports, you meet at some little thatch't
Alehouse; and like our dirty tun-belly'd Carmen, overload your Stomachs,
Stupify your brains; and put out the spark of reason with the thick foggs of
fulsome vulgar Ale; then reel to bed, abundantly drunk by Nine a Clock: The
Night was made for the frollicks and revellings of a Gentleman, and for none
but poor laboring slaves to sleep in; Is not this abundantly a more refined
way then yours? ha


Ay, never stir in it Cousin Sir John; and I am resolved for the future, I Will be
plaguey unlucky, and grow as mad and frollicksome as the best of you


Under this window, do you hear fellows.


Sweet Caelia look down from your window
See how we our Claret environ;
How we take off our Glass,
At the sound of our brass,
And the harmony of our cold Iron.
Strik up merry boys
With your tongs and your keys,
My Kettle I Will twank in the Chorus:
We Will scour every street,
And kick all we meet,
And drive the whole World before us.
The Cupids all hover around us,
And then on your Casement they settle;
As huge Clusters of Bees,
Hang on twigs of green Trees,
Charmed with the sweet sound of my Kettle.
Strike up merry boys, etc.
Ah Caelia look down from your window,
And view your poor Lover a Strowling,
How for puss I by night,
Quarrel, scratch, brawl and fight,
There Is no Love to true Caterwauling.
Strike up merry boys, etc.

Admirable humor I'Gad: It is time we retire, see the Morning begins to peep
abroad, with its Impertinent light -- But hold Captain, fir^^ let us hear the
Catalogue of this Nights adventures; I shall be ill at rest all this day
following if we have not done a plaguey deal of mischief


Let Us see; about some Eight Sign-Posts pulled down, as many Walls scall'd and
Demollish'd, a doze

Persons taken Prisoners; a few Straggling Whores pist upon and kicked; Besides
about as much glass broken as would serve for the windows of Paul's; Knockers
pulled off from doors, and they from their hinges, innumerable; Signs blotted
out, Cobblers and hucstkers Stalls broke open in abundance, to the confusion of
old Shoes and Gingerbread; and the Watch kick't to the Devil


Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars! O brave Cousin Sir John I Will Swear, O brave Sir
John I say


Huzza, Huzza! Come Captain, let us go off in Triumph.


March on ye Sons of Mars, and boys of Mettle, You clash your Iron; and I Will
twank my Kettle


Primrose.


Your pleasure Madam.


Come hither; pin up this Curl, and adjust the dress of my head: -- Oh hideous,
what a piece of Gallantry have we had here? If this trade hold; I must even
change my lodgings; what with the hoarse cry of the Bell-mans mortifying
Rhymes, the Barbarous Music of tooting hoboys, and the more Intolerable
Civilities of Serenading fools, there is little rest to be taken; from such
humors good Love deliver me


No doubt Madam, but this was designed for a piece of Bravery; and I question
not but to oblige you; as well as to show the Gentleman's wit and way of address


The obligation would have been greater had he let it alone: prithee, can
thou Imagine who the person is, that has thus highly obliged me


I Will lay my life on it Madam, this was one of Sr. John Oldfops Maggots; he
scorns any thing that is vulgar, as he styles it


That Infinite Coxcomb, that miscellany of fools; indeed he is always fond of
all the folly's of the Town; and to make himself more Eminently ridiculous,
varnishes over the Imperfections and deformities of old Age, with the gloss and
affected gayety of Youth; he has the vanity to think himself the only
favorite; the very Adonis of the Ladys, though fool enough to be scorned by all:
an eternal railer against Age, and will Curse it, though he knows the
Imprecations must necessarily fall on his own head


Well, I must for some time at least, wear the mask of Dissimulation; Nor need
I fear to be singular in this, Since our Sex very rarely appears without it

O Gemini, what a pestilent noise has here been; I vow now I tremble every
joint about me


Here Is a piece of Country-Innocence, rude and unpollish'd as a Sylvan, she is
so very simple; one would swear she had lived Sequestered from the Conversation
of mankind. -- Come, come; lay aside your needless fears, little one; this was
nothing but a Town humor, a Serenade


A Serenade, what is that? pray forsooth:


Why, an Entertainment that the gallants think to pleasure their Mistresses
with; it is to put young Ladys in mind of their Servants; lest they should
forget to dream of 'em


Should the Sparks but know that you were hero, you would quickly have the second
part to the same tune, Madam


They Would be continually Buzzing about you, like Bees in a Garden of Flowers. One
would ogle and languish at you with his arms folded across, and his head on
one side thus. Another Cock, and look big upon you; rap out half a dozen modish
oaths; -- shake his Garniture, and pass by you with a low-diving bow; and a
three quarter face, as thus, -- A third descant on your perfections; as the
delicacy of your lively Complexion; the Symetry of your parts; the
agreeableness of your features; and so loud, as you may be sure to hear him


A fourth make verses upon you; treat; present and Serenade you.


And the fifth perhaps, something more foppish then the rest would passionately
swear, your teeth were pearl, your Lips Coral, that your breath was perfumed
with Arabian sweets, your eyes two Stars, nay two rising Suns for a need, and
that on your Cheeks were two Beds of Roses, where the Cupids lay wantoning, and
basking themselves, in their Golden Rays


O Gemini, this is fine I vow; -- But would they indeed now forsooth.


Yes, yes, and more then all this; But you must not believe 'em; they are
Rooks, and never play upon the square; foot-padders that lie upon the Road of
Love to rifle maids of their virginity


O living Dear; not believe them indeed; -- but I would though: how would they
rifle me of my virginity trow? -- pray forsooth tell me


That I Am to learn my self; I never made the experiment, O fie; I vow her
simplicity makes me blush; I must divert her from this Idle discourse: prithee
Dorinda what is your servants name? when came he to town


O forsooth his name is Bellamore; he came last night, and his man has hired
lodgings already for him in this house. -- O If you did but see him; -- he goes
as fine as a Lord; and he tells me he has been at Court, and in France to


After what manner does he make Court to thee?


O he gives me Oranges and Sweetmeats, Curious Ribbons and Laces, talks fine
Complements to me indeed; and calls me the prettiest names; tells me my lips
are sprinkled over with honey-drops, then he will kiss me, and kiss me again; --
he told me too, that I must have a Care of the fine Gentlemen of the Town, for
he said they would make a Miss of me -- I Would fain know what that is forsooth; pray
will you tell me


Methinks I long to see this Gentleman; I fancy he is a very agreeable person,
at least more tolerable than those diverting Coxcombs I now entertain


Now durst I venture the forfeiture of my Maidenhead to the next kind Devil I
meet; this Mistress of mine is contriving to make prize of her Lover; for she will
entertain all sorts and sizes, though it be merely for her diversion; and hates
to see any one courted besides her self; nay, for my part, I believe she would
by her good will engross all mankind


Well, it is a most delicious morning; the clearness of the heavens, and the
still air seem to invite us abroad. -- Come Dorinda, are you for a walk? --
I Will have you to the park where you shall see fine Ladies and Gentlemen; -- get
my dress ready against I return, and bid the Boy follow us to the Mall


Would the Gentlemen kiss a body tho? I vow, if they should, I Would never endure
'em, that I would not

Successfully to Cheat, there is no pretense,
Like to a well dissembled Innocence.

Well Sir, how stand affairs? -- is there any hope for my once shipwrackt
vessel, now at last to return home with the prize of a humer some Mistress? --
speak have thou been there? -- this is the time and place I appointed you to
meet me at, is it not


You are in the right on it Sir; and I perceive you are a man of a notable
memory


And you procured me lodgings in the house with hers, and seen 'em furnished
fit to receive a Gentleman


May be ay, Sir, and may be no, Sir, -- I know nothing of the matter Sir, -- I
am very busy at the present -- Your humble Servant Sir --


God's Death! what does the Rascal mean? his Insolence and slight behavior will
provoke me; -- But by this I imagine he has had success; and he only keeps me
off as a politic mistress does her Servant, with a wanton kind of anger,
faint denial, and a grateful little pettishness, only that when he comes to
the business, he may embrace it the more eagerly


I understand you not -- No, no, Sir, you know I am to lie upon Benches at
Tavern-doors, till one or two a Clock with a Flambeaux in my hand, amongst an
honorable train of footmen and link-boys; and for want of a tester to drink
wine with flys in it, which the generous Bar-keeper is to give me out of a
vessel that has been filled with the dregs, and Squeezings of an hundred
several Bottles


What? I suppose you remember the last weeks business yet?


Then am I to be stripped of your old silk wastcoat here; and clapped into a
wide-body'd livery Coat, laid down on every Seam with a worsted Lace, of a
Groat or three pence a yard, like a Country Esquires Coachman; and this was the
Equipage poor Toby was to be in


This is past enduring, -- Durst you hit me in the teeth -- or murmur -- you
Son of a Whore? I Will slit your nose


Have a care you know the Act Sir; -- Slit my nose quoth a! -- That Is pretty
In Faith; -- Slit my nose quoth a


Hell and the Devil; this it is to employ our Senyants: a man had better be at
the necessary Charge of a procuring friend then trust 'em; -- For when once
they know your Secrets, and that they are absolutely necessary in doing you a
kindness, they grow more Saucy then a Rich Citizen to a young Student that owes
him money; and so at last they become more Master then your self. -- Know you
Rascal, who I am; and who you are


Yes, yes, Sir, I was your Servant; and now I am not your Servant; and so as I
said before, as by way of Complement, I am your humble Servant


How! you hungry Scrap-eater, what mean you Rascal? I Will swinge you, -- This
shall bring you to a better knowledge of your self --


Nay Master, hold; -- Oh the Devil, Sir, -- Oh for heavens sake Sir, -- as I
hope to be saved 'twas all in jest, -- pox on it -- Nay now Master, you over-act
your part too; -- I beseech you a little Cessation from arms, as I hope for
mercy from you now, I thought no harm: too much is too much. -- Sir, to be as
short with you as I can at present, your business is done beyond Expectation


So; at last, you have spoken to the purpose; but I thought thou had known
that it is as ill jesting with an hungry Lover, as an hungry Lion: For if once
you Tantalize him with his prey, if possible he Seizes on his keeper. Remember
this, and take it from me


Nay Sir; no doubt but I shall remember I took it from you: plague on this
Lyon-way of Civility though for me


And now Sir, as you hope not to use a Surgeon, or to look like an old mangled
fencer, with your pate embroidered with hacks and slashes; and perhaps the
disuse of a member or two, let us have no more of these Bawdy House tricks; and
here for this time I strike a league with you, and now let me have a faithful
account of Dorinda and your proceedings


Now the Devil take me, if I can forbear telling this Master of mine the
Business: 'plague, it would never vex a man to have a broken pate, if he is well
paid for it. There Is some Conscience in this, --


Well Sir, to the Business.


In fine then Sir; (as a man may say) I have taken up Lodgings for you at my
Lady Fancyfulls, that Pageant of formalities; and monument of Antiquity; she
who deports her self so amorously toward every body; who is still mustring up
her hundred thousand sweet-hearts, pretended presents, and Love Letters, which
she always carrys about with her


Then as to Dorinda.


Why things are in a very fair way there too; she goes without the least
suspicion, and her disguise sits upon her so agreeably that you would almost be
deceived your self in her


And is Loveby in Town?


Yes Sir; well Sir, I say no more; -- You Are a happy man.

Sings:

I showed 'em such money as made 'em all mad,
But they are quite deceived in Toby, etc.

I Am glad of it for some private Reason: -- I suppose by this time, he is very
much reformed


O Sir extremely; he drinks bloodily, Swears devoutly, and wenches like a
Gentleman; for whereas he used to keep a brace of punks or so, now instead of
them he deals with half a score, and that he may still have a fresh supply,
when he grows weary, he quarrels with the old, to pleasure a new Mistress; and
so he Intends to lie round with all the women in the Town by degrees


What at your old tricks?


Mum, mum, Sir. --


All things have hitherto fortunately met my Expectation, the rest must be
partly effected, by my own Care and Conduct; See that all things are in
readyness at my Lodgings and wait for me there


Sweet Mr. Toby, yours.


Mrs Primrose, Yours to the Antipodes;


So sharp set this morning; when comes your Master to his Lodgings?


This morning I think, he bid me wait for him here; pox, I care not when he
comes; O when shall I come into the Closet of your affections

I took her by the Lilly white hand,
And led her into the Garden,
I kissed her once and kissed her twice,
For four-pence halfpenny farthing.

Come, pray Mr. Toby let us have no more of this Lip-work; If you turn a
kissing-fool I shall begin to suspect you are good for nothing else; -- But
prithee how long is it since you left your old Master Sir Thomas


Ever since I lived with this -- Prithee when will thou leave thy old Mistress?


Faith even when she will keep me no longer -- I understand your Master is a
Servant to Dorinda, the young innocent Country Lady


Yes, he is as great an admirer of Innocence, as thou art of fine Clothes, or an
handsome smug-fac'd fellow -- what is become of that knot of fools that used to
haunt thy Lady


Why some will be forthcoming anon; we have a leash of choice culled Asses; --
first there is Old-fop, one that was knighted, that he might appear more
Eminently a Coxcomb


What? he that is of kin to Dulhead the Booby, Esquire. that lately arrived here?
-- This latter is so Silly an Idiot, but for the interest of some Courtfriends,
his Estate had been begged long e're this


Right there is a brace, and this dough*bak'd fool is to be Introduced I near by
his Cousin, as a Suitor to my Lady: Next; there is a superannuated fondling,
that has lived to be twice a Child; one that numbered more years then he has
hairs on his head


Old Waspish you mean; why he has not had the use of a sense these ten years;
he is a deaths-head; and enough to put one in mind of mortality, and then he is
so feeble he seems to bend beneath the weight of his Clothes


He neither sees nor hears, without Artificial helps; and if he chance to find
you speak, and he hears you not, he Immediately conjectures you abuse or deride
him; then he falls into a passion, and grows as pettish, as one lately
recovered from a long fit of sickness, he fancies himself a great humourist,
and thinks that, together with the writings of his Estate, which he always
brings with him, sufficient to atone for all his folly and Imperfections. Ads
my life, stand back: here he comes, with all his trangums about him


So, so, very well I protest; very well I protest; it is you Mrs Prim, speak not
a word yet Mrs. ^rim

Not too loud Mrs Prim. -- now tell me of pretty little Florella; -- Ah! it is a
Rogue, a pretty Rogue, I fack


My Lady Sir. --


O fie Mrs. Prim. not so loud, not so loud; I warrant you think me quite deaf,
I say you think me deaf, no such matter; O fie, fie, you make as much noise in
my Ears, as the Trumpets of Six Troops of horse. I Am a little thick of
hearing, it is true: O Come, come, here is a Sixpence for you, a Phillip and
Mary; a five piece, a pretty piece, a very pretty piece; Nay, nay, you shall
take it, a pretty piece I vow: so, so, now try again Mrs. Prim


My Lady Sir --


Very well, very well, I protest; exactly in that tone, in that pitch; let us
bear it Mrs* Prim


My Lady is gone to the Park this morning, Sir, for a walk, but I expect her
home within this hour


Uds bodykins; Carrion, Strumpet, laugh at me; I protest, laugh at me when I
have been so generous, Snoons speak not a word, not a word

Come here;

I forget and forgive --


Sir I Have a grievous Cold, and am so perplexed with a tickling Cough, I hope
you will excuse what I could not avoid, Sir


Yes, yes, Come Mrs. Prim. all is over, all is over -- Come let us here the rest
Mrs. Prim


You may assure your self you are not the least in her favor; for you were the
last she spoke of when she went to bed last night; and the first this morning,
when she rose


Say you so, say you so, I protest; Incomparable Creature. Divine Charming
Florella

put her in mind of me Mrs. Prim. -- I know she likes my pretty Innocent
humors, Come hither Mrs Prim. kiss me, Udsbodikins kiss me I say

kiss me you Rogue, -- I know she likes my humors, I Will tickle you,
Udsbodikins I Will tickle you


I can hold no longer --


What again? Snoons grant me patience, Devil Incarnate, what do you mean? -- I
protest unsufferable, give me my money again, or I Will give out you robbed me;
-- I know the marks and can swear to the peace, Snoons --


I must after this old Monkey, and sooth him into a better humor if I can


Prithee stay, I cannot be without your good Company, your Conversation is so
Charming


Sweet Mr. Toby; your good nature will ruin you.


Not when I bestow it on one who will be grateful, and make suitable returns*


No fooling; I must try to pacify and secure this pettish old Coxcomb: Sr. John
Oldfop will be here I suppose, within this half hour; And should they meet,
he would snub him and torment him, to that degree; he would fly from the house, as from
the Plague; and my Lady would loose great part of this days diversion


Faith they are a brace of pleasant old Coxcombs, and make a more Comicall
figure, then the most accomplished young Fops she could have met with

A numerous herd of Fools, still stock the Nation,
And he that is no fool now, is out of fashion:
But though new Coyns for Fools are daily making,
The old Fools still pass best, and are more taking.
And I took her, etc.

ARe you sure you dogged her into this house?


Yes Sir.


Faith the little Rogue has fired my blood; she is young and beautiful as an
opening Rose; and has such pretty wanton Rolling eyes, But withal such an
overruling Modesty. -- A temptation like this would make a Saint stand on his
Guard: For my part, I must confess my frailty. -- I can no more forbear
Importuning this new beauty, then a Rook can fleecing a new Cully; -- I have no
other Business for you now; about two meet me at the Eating-house


Mr. Loveby here! Nay, then here is some intrigue in hand; my life for it, the
young Country Lady is the mark he aims at, his hankering about a Lady's door is
as certain a sign of some Amor there-abouts, as a mask in the Pit is of a
trading Wench


A good morning to thee Primrose, is thy Lady at home?


Yes Sir; she came in just before you; and the other Lady you saw in the Mall
this morning


How the Devil came she to know that?


I can tell you this for your Comfort, your market's fore-stall'd; there is a
Gentleman lately come to Town, has given earnest for her already


No matter; it is not amiss to know how the Prizes of the Marks go though, that a
man may learn how to make his bargain the better another time. But seriously
art thou sure the Lady's disposed of


He seems to be something Concerned; -- so I Will assurs you. -- It fares with a
fresh beauty in this Town, as with a fly fluttering on the top of the water;
you shall ^^^e forty sparks rising at her; and it is ten to one, if some one
does not chop ^er down at last -- Loveby I wonder at your fancy, that amongst
so great choice of riper Clusters you should pick out green grapes


Pox; this hungry she-Cannibal is fasting this morning, and has a mind to
breakfast on man's flesh --


I perceive you misconstrue me; -- If you did but hear the Ladys talk of you,
as I have; -- They say you are the wildest most Unconstant Wenching Gentleman,
that ever came to Town


In that they wrong me; for I stand with open arms ready to embrace every kind
she that comes by. -- If there be any Inconstancy, it is in them, in flying
from me. I Am sure I am as civil a person to 'em, as any I have heard of; and
do intend to oblige 'em all, as fast as I can. -- The Devil's in it if this be
Inconstancy


The very thing they upbraid you with; they say you always Ungratefully deseit
an old Mistress; though she had been ever so kind to you, if you have but the
least prospect of a new one


Faith; In my Opinion they are a Company of Unreasonable Creatures to desire a
man to wear out his whole life in the service of one, when there are hundreds
that expect the same kindness; -- An old mistress, like a Cast-suit is to be
worn on rainy days only; but to be thrown off and laid by when a new one
shines on us


O living dear! I wonder he stays so long from me, I doubt he is unkind.


No Madam; I dare pass my word for the Gentleman, he is not, for he is here, or
one at least, that can boast of as noble and generous a passion for you; as the
greatest Idolater of your fair eyes


He has her as Cock-sure as if she was between a pair of sheets with him; --
With what an awful respect he approached her; with what a profound Reverence
he bowed; what a Softness and languishing he wore in his looks


O living Sir; I wonder you will offer to do so; you made me start at the very
sight of you; I never saw you before in all my life


What Country-Innocence is here? --


A person of a becoming boldness; and has the looks and breeding of a
Gentleman, -- aside -- O Gemini, Sir, and do you know me indeed? I cannot
believe you, I vow and swear now


I had the honor to kiss your fair hands in the Country, Madam.


I am amazed at his Confidence. On my Conscience he never saw her till this
morning; I wonder what fetch he has now


Primr se help me out, or I Gad I Am gravelled. What Country-woman, her name
quickly


Horrid! Sir, have you no Conscience? -- Her name Dorinda, near Canterbury in
Kent


Dear, Dear Dorinda; and have I slipped out of your memory since I saw you in
Kent last. -- How do all our acquaintance near Canterbury


A forward Gentleman --


Perfectly well, Madam; and I came to wait on you to present you with a new
Song

Forbear fond God, forbear your Dart,
Seek not to wound a dying heart:
At Cloe's feet it gasping lies,
A bleeding Victim to her Conquering Eyes.
From her Death's such a pleasing Pain,
I Would only live to dye again:
With joy to him, the blow is given,
That has so near a prospect of his heaven.
You and the little Loves all fly
To light their Torches at her eye;
By her alone, your Empires thrive,
This Vestall keeps Loves Sacred fire alive.
Then Cloe, it is not strange that you
Weak Mortals, Yiedling hearts Subdue;
Since you another Venus prove,
And give new being to the God of Love.
pardon my Ambition Madam, that I dare approach so much Divinity


If she has but one Iuscious touch, of his melting lip, She Is lost for ever: It
will dissolve and distill it self into her heart, in a warm shower of Love


If you offer to kiss me, I vow and swear I Will Scream out as loud as I can: I
wonder you will serve a body so; you Gentlemen have no modesty I think


It Is not fit we should, such young Ladys as you have so much of it, that had
we any, we should never beget a Right understanding betwixt us; -- Madam, be
pleased to use me as your Servant; to show you the splendor of the Court; the
Celebrated Beauties of the Drawing Room, and the pleasures of an high-Mall


Mr. Loveby here, and so intimate already with Dorinda? Indeed I observed he
wheeled about us, to day, like a Kite that often sails round the same Circuit
of air, when in quest of her prey --


Madam, in Business of Importance, we usually ride post; was I to dispatch a
weighty affair for my friend, I Would not ride a dull Carriers pace; Love's upon
the wing, and must be nimbly pursued


Indeed forsooth I believe this is one of the Sparks you spoke of, he was so
rude, he would have kissed me


I thought a person worn so much by the full-blown Beauties of the Town, would
not have made a stoop, for so young a Quarry. I must confess the Lady has a
great favor, but to Converse with a Beau-garcon; one of your Accomplishments
Sir


Madam; I cannot complain much of my ill fate; -- Some women think me worth
picking up; my only misfortune is, your opinion is different from theirs: I
should be Completely happy did you approve their choice


Madam, there is a strange Gentleman within desires to speak with you.


Tell him, I wait on him.

This Mr. Loveby wears such Charms about him; it will be as difficult to Escape
him; as it is dangerous to lov

Pity you gallants should so wedded be
To Wildness, Falsehood and Inconstancy.

All Certainly that have the honor to know you, must applaud and envy 'em
for it


Madam; did not I know your Influence on our Sex, and that you turned our Love
into Ridicule, I should be so vain, as to think you had not really an Aversion
to me


O fie Mr. Loveby, this from you?


But you are one of the topping, reigning Beauties of the Town; an Impregnable
fort; not to be taken by the Sallys of Wit; nor even the brisk attempts of Love
and Honor: You from your exalted height can look down with a Contemning Smile,
on your Shipwrack'd Lovers, toyling and beaten about by a tempestuous Sea


A Blustering piece of Rhetoric this; and very fit for the description of a
Tempest, -- laughs again.] With that Demureness I warrant you, and Compassion
in your looks, and such dying eyes; really it is Impossible to hold out long,
against so many Charms; we shall have you fall into a fit of Ryming anon


Madam, Madam, here is Sr. John come.


Dear Madam, I kiss your hand ten thousand times: Mr. Loveby, your most devoted
Servant; you are a great favorite of the Ladies; this Lady yielding you the
honor of her Conversation, is a confirmation of it


It Is you Sr. John are the Idol of the fair Sex* you Charm their Eyes, and
Captivate their hearts; you are the Sole commander of all Loves Troops; we are
but Idle spectators and admirers of your great Conquests


I have Contracted a familiarity with some persons of quality in this Town:
they do me the honor to use me as their Servant in public


Now Is this Conceited Fop, ready to boast of kindnesses he never Received.


Let us but sooth him, and be urgent with him upon the point, and he will be so
vain as to tell us, he has debauched all the great Beauties at Court. -- He Will
make the Drawing Room his Seraglio; though he never arrived to the acquaintance
of a Change woman; or his Seamstress -- John, a person of your Jantee
Insinuating way, must needs be taken into Consideration


I must confess I have an Intimacy, with some particular Ladies that shall be
nameless. We women's men, never boast of your favors Madam --


O Sir; you men of Intrigue as well as Soldiers, learn to know that silence is
your first word of Command


Madam, You Have hit my humor -- Lady: I gad I had almost forgot to tell you of
a pleasant accident between me and a person of quality, in Hyde-park, lately: I
side-glass'd her, and kissed my hand to her. -- I gad, I never saw her to my
knowledge in my life before: -- She Immediately sent her Page to me with a
Billet-Deux; wherein she begged the honor of a meeting: and this very Lady, I
have appointed to come to my Apartment; within this half hour


Then we shall loose the pleasure of your good Company, Sr. John.


No dear Madam; I Will disappoint her, to Regale my self with the gallantries of
your Ladyship -- I know her Excess of Love will easily form an excuse for my
neglect


Ahgra, besht tou here joy? By Shaint Patrick I did think thou didshst lost me.


What is the Lady come, Sirrah?


Lady, Lady; what Lady joy?


A pleasant Scene toward:


You Ignorant Rascal; -- Why the Lady I bid you wait for with her Coach and
six; attended by a very great Equipage


Ecpash! prithee Joy phat is dat? their be no such wort in Ireland, by my
shoul: -- I did she no Lady, But I will go fetch thee a Lady in a Coach if
thou will joy

Ahgra; by Chreesht I did forgot; thou do'sht mean the Lady, thou disht bid me
say, was come to see thee


This Rascal Mr. Loveby; this thick-scull'd fool, Madam, does not well
understand English, and so did not take my meaning


So it seems.


My watch speaks not the time of the appointment yet, it wants half a quarter.


If thy wash did shay sho: I would make beat on thy washes pate; and tell him,
he did lie to his faish, look thee joy


Run Immediately, --

Hey Rascal; take your message with you.


I did take my message when I will come back: Thou didsht bid me run firsht.


Whither, you senseless puppy?


By my Shoul, I know not; but I will run to Ireland for thee, if thou will Joy.


Hark you; Run to my Lodgings and stay there till I or the Lady comes: Do you
hear Sirrah? mend that damned Bogg-trotting pace of yours: Diversion when I am
out of humor; the awkard Fool serves to make me laugh


Pox; I trifle away my time with this gay-plum'd Parrot. I must have the other
Encounter with this pretty little Innocent Creature. Her fair Image glides
through my eyes into my heart, and has there left the deep Impression of her dear
self. -- Methinks I feel strange motions within me; pray heavens they prove not
the qualms of settled Love


The Son of a whore my Tailor, Madam; has cut my Coat damnable ill. Bungling
Puppy

He has no Genius Madam: The fancy was wholly mine: How do you like it? -- But
for the proportion of my Body the Rascal has rendered me ridiculous


I protest Sir John, you're extremely well dressed; and every thing sits on you,
so nicely exact; and with such a becoming Air

How the Peacock spreads his

Plumes and strutts.


Madam, I labor not to be Scandalous,


But ridiculous.


A Gentleman ought to be known as well by his garb, and manner of dress, as a
Bully by a black eye, a Buff Belt, and a long Sword; Madam, I am happy this my
dress has gained the Reputation of your applauded judgment --


I know this gay nauseous Coxcomb would be harping on that string --


The women are pleased to think my manner Novel and taking -- 'Twas a humor
not Vulgar by the young fidling, Serenading-Fops of the Town; In confidence of
which I took this freedom, knowing in Justice I ought not to serve any woman
before your Ladyship


Incorrigible Fop.


You had the Virginity of the humor -- For which Madam I might with some
pretense Claim a right to yours, by way of Retaliation

There I think I was full patt and home upon you, I Gad.


Fulsome fool; He takes this for wit, but he deserves for his Impudence to be
swing'd by Footmen: But the pleasure of laughing at him shall be his punishment


Madam, I would not tempt you to that dull unfashionable formality of
Matrimony, had not I a true English Blockhead a Cousin of mine, to be the
Screen to your Honor: Providence ordained fools for Husbands, that the kind
Ladies might without Scandal Converse with and gratify Men of Parts and
Breeding


Dear Sir John, you are too obliging really.


He has the Proverb on his side; and can jointure you well: But if you think
not his Estate sufficient, I Will add four or five hundred pounds a year to 't,
the satisfaction I shall receive from your Charming Conversation will pay me
back with Interest


Dear Sir when comes he?


He is now in Town; -- I Will borow my self from you a little to send for him; --
Dear, dear Madam, pardon my abrupt departure. -- Think not my absence tedious,
upon my honor I Will return Instantly. --


I think I shall not; this is a strange conceited Coxcomb; he is a mint of
folly; and Coyns himself new fool every minute


Madam; here is old Waspish; and has brought with him the writings of his
Estate. I put him into a strange fit of anger to day; and have but just calmed
him


Tell him we will give him Auidence. -- His humor will divert the cloying
thoughts of the others; and give a new pleasure; -- Bless me, sure it is
fool-fair


O Mrs. Florry, Mrs. Florry; your humble Servant, sweet Mrs. Florry.


We must take care how we vex him; he takes fire at the least spark. Welcome
Sir --


Say you so, say you so; very well, I protest very well. -- Nay I think you
like my humors, my pretty little Innocent humors; -- Udsbodykins, you are a
Charming Creature; a fair, brisk, sprightly, lively Creature --

You little Fubs you; you Pug you; I protest I love you.


And there are those that have a passion for you Sir, but Modesty will not let
'em speak


I cannot contain, I shall laugh outright, I Have almost bit my lips to pieces.


Come, come, I protest, Confess, Confess; I know who spoke of, who last; when
somebody went to Bed; and first when she rose this morning; ha! ha! you little
Fubs you; you Pug you; I Will bite you; I Will bite yo

My Love and I, did lately sit,
Playing for sport, at Cherry-pit;
She threw, I cast, and having thrown,
I got the pit, and she the Stone.
Good I protest, very good I protest; I got the pit, etc.


Pardon me Sir; I protest you have such pleasant humors; you would kill a body
with laughing


Ah! I protest; I knew you liked my humors; you little Fubs you, I Am sure you
like my humors


Now for a fit of railing.


Ha, ha, ha, here is an old fool; a nauseous, old, and an humoursome fool as he
thinks. -- Damn the Rogue, I Will laugh at him. --


He does not perceive him yet, here is fine work toward.


Pox; he has not the use of a sense; a rotten Carcass that is almost buried in
the ruins time has thrown on him. I hate to see a Nauseous old fool, Madam, I
wonder you can endure his Impertinences


I use him only for my Diversion; as my Monkey, or Shock-Dog.


Should you bring your monkey, yet in my opinion you are a prettier figure your
self, and far more diverting


Snoons, snoons; -- I protest he abuses me; -- speak Mrs. Prim. He abuses me;
Udsbodykins a Fop; an old worn out Court-fop -- He abuses me! -- Snoons, --
Snoons


Pardon me Madam; that I could not pay my Devoire's to you before; -- This
damned old Fool, has almost put me out of humor; -- My Cousin will be here
presently Madam to wait on you


Pox; Fancifull here! She Will be a worse plague then the other. Come Madam; let
you and I retire


I must beg your Excuse. Here is a stranger I must pay my respects to.


I Am glad Sir, you like your Lodgings; I vow I cannot Choose but stare on you;
with a little more then ordinary concern: You Are so like a former Servant of
mine; I cannot but admire his picture in your person. Pardon my rudeness


I Am glad Madam, I can contribute any way to your satisfaction; Heavens, She Will
bait me to death


Your servant Sr. John: Your servant Madam.


Plague on her Unseasonable Civilities; now must we be troubled with her
Impertinences. She Is a sheet of Rivell'd parchment, on which is Impressed a
perpetual Almanac. By her you may know, when we shall have wind, rain or snow;
and all the alterations of weather

Madam we have business; and we shall buy no pedlars ware.


Pedlars ware! I Would have you to know, here is nothing but what is almost of
Inestimable value -- Do you call this Pedlars ware


So nows she is in.


Pray Sir, do me the honor to hold this a little; I Will show you as Choice
presents, as the most Celebrated Beauty of 'em all. Here Is a Locket of
Diamonds, that was given me by Sir. Thomas Court-hard


They are false; and the Locket is not worth above a Guinea; Damn her; she will
put me out of humor


I would not that Sr. Thomas heard you; He give me false stones? -- Then here is
a little pocket-glass of my Lord Modishes; cased with beaten Gold


Be ruled by me and break it; -- Should you look into it it; you would certainly run
mad the next minute and hang your self


I dare look in it, you see; without the danger you speak of. Then here is a Lock
of hair of my Lord Passionates; which he gave me a little before he died


O keep it, keep it; you may have use for it.


Then here are three Rings, a Seal, and a Watch: -- O dear, and here is a Love
letter of Sr George Fair-titles: Do but hear what a fine penned thing it is


Damn her, I shall rail outright presently; affected Fool, Come Madam will you
go? her discourse Nauseates


Indeed you shall not go, and leave me alone with this Gentleman.


I understand you, Madam; we'd rid you of that trouble: Come pray will you
honor us with your Company


Thou have released me from one Curse, to plague me with a greater, did not the
Company of that dear Saint sweeten it with a blessing that far exceeds both


Madam, the favor of your hand.


I could better afford it that Gentleman.


A Rude Uncivil person; Sr. Frederick Wilful would not have served me so:

Well, lie thou there good Sr. George, and Sr. Thomas, there; My Lord Modish
there; My Lord Passionate and the rest in their order. Once I was Courted
lascivious Poems,

What the Age did my drooping glories shroud,
Yet by the Envious, it must be allowed
The Sun still shines, though it is behind a Cloud.

A Woman to be believed? yes, so is a Courtier when he promises you preferment;
or a crafty wheedling Tradesman when he commends his Commodities to you upon
his Credit


Why, Sir, Sir -- he certainly dreams and talks in his sleep: Dulhead but now,
though merely to laugh at him, you're grown as jealous as a Tradesman newly
married to a plump juicy Wench in an University


She Is false, false as hell. Should any one assert a Woman could go to Heaven,
I should suspect Providence, Embrace Atheism as Orthodox, and sound Divinity;
and make it my Creed that all things were governed by the uncertain whirl of
blind chance


What Sir, are you turned Fanatic, that you rave thus against the Civil
Government of your Mistress


Perfidious Florella, the Common Custom of discountenanced Fools; how
respectfully did she entertain that Indigested lump of Ignorance; How she
smiled when he spoke; enough to inform the dull Mast with new life and Soul,
and seemed to applaud every thing he said


Heavens bless this Master of mine, we shall have him picking of straws within
these two days -- Sir, Sir, if you are come to your self and know your humble
Servant ^oby --


Yes, Sirrah; I will discover my self, upbraid her to her face; Charge her with
her knot of Fools, Curse her heartily, resolutely leave her, then fly into some
obscure Village, mew my self up in a lonely Cell, and there rail at her, and
her whole Sex with my last gasp of breath


You had best run stark staring mad with causeless Jealousies, fall into a fit
of despair, hang your self in an ill humor, and to cross a good old Proverb,
go to the Devil in a string


My humor will not bear with your fooleries at present.


Mum, Mum, Sir, Mum; -- A pox on these pettish Lovers for me --


And my business requires you to be serious.


Then observe me, Sir, I Will undertake to manage this business to your
satisfaction: I Will render Dulhead, if possible, more Ridiculous, Choose Oldfop
of a blessing on my endeavors, and fright the easy Squire, and the Lady
Fancifull into a fit of Matrimony, and thus make your access so easy to your
Mistress, she shall fall into your hand, and lie and wriggle there, like a
trout when tickled


It Is Impossible.


For you to be convinced; But Sir, since you startle thus at a Bugbear of your
own creating, leave the success of your Amor to me; If I do not bring her to
your Arms, may I despair of the smiles of a smutty Kitchen-Wench, and for my
default, undergo the severity of Whip and Bell, with the turn-spits


I scorn the spoils of a Mistress, procured for me, by the Stratagems of my
Slave, as much as I would the honor of a Triumph, when I had never the Courage
to be in the Action: Should thy mean Conduct bring her to a Surrender, she would
fall so low in my esteem, that I should think her beneath my Consideration


But Sir, 'twou'd not be amiss to have a Scout to view the Posture of the Enemy.


True; but I Will post my self so honorably, that if I succeed, the greatest
share of Glory gained in this Conquest shall Crown my attempts: Wherefore I Will
immediately forge a Letter, and therein tax her with Pride, and Inconstancy,
wound her Reputation, and withal, insinuate to her, I have provided my self
with a Mistress, far more Beautiful, and one that suits nearer to my
Inclinations


Zookes, ply her there, Sir, the day's your own: Enter your Troy, and take your
Helena: If she is not your Captive, I in revenge will grow lousy in spite of
clean linen, turn Pimp in good earnest, and so devoutly dye in an honorable
and public Employment


Mr. Toby, your humble Servant.


Mr. Toby: Now do I know by these kind words, and that ominous smile, I Have a
Reverend Office to be thrown upon me


Here Is a broad piece that was given me by Sr. Oliver Richmore -- look on it --
it is a very fair piece; I Would not have parted with it to any breathing but your
self


Pox; I know the Devil was sending me on an Errand, and pays me with Gold. A
pox on his kindness -- a fair tempter this Omnipotent Gold, I Am thy humble
Votary


I hope Sir, you have remembered me.


Madam, I Have been bruising my brains for you; and I have at last contrived a
plot, which I have just brought to Maturity, that cost me not a few pangs in
the production


I shall not be ungrateful, sweet Mr Toby.


But to back my design, it would not be amiss to muster up all your Charms;
which I grant of themselves are sufficient to bring the most stubborn heart
into subjection


Your goodness makes me blush seriously -- But to put in practice your
seasonable advice, I Will instantly to Florella, rail at her for entertaining Mr.
Dulhead, possess him with an opinion of her double-dealing, and make my
advances of Love with all the passion Imaginable: Your Servant -- be mindful
sweet Mr. Toby


A very Amorous Creature! was I a Magistrate, I Would have such a wrinckl'd
scarecrow set up at every Bawdy-house-door, to frighten young Sinners from the
Forbidden-Fruit of Whores-Flesh


Have thou had any discourse with his Man about the particulars of his Master?


Very little yet, Madam, But here he is, very opportunely, and your Ladyship
may be Informed of every Circumstance


Do you belong to the Gentleman that came hither this morning?


Yes, Madam.


How long has he been in Town, Friend?


About two days Madam.


'Faith my Mistress is for have at all.


How long does he design to stay?


Madam, my Masters young Lady Dorinda can give you the best account of that,
were they linked; which this day he designs to effect; his grand affair is over


I must contrive to put a rub in his way: What Is his Estate?


Report says, five thousand a year.


A very fair Revenue, though not perhaps equal to the Merit of so complete a
Gentleman


She comes on a-pace; -- Little does she dream of the Snake in the Covert; If
he once lays hold, he twists round her in so many painted folds, she will never be
able to disentangle her self: was my angry threatening Master here, how would
his heart Caper at the harmony of these kind ravishing words: I Will Instantly to
him, and acquaint him with it


I have hunted her through every Room 'ith house; Perhaps she is herded here:
Madam, your servant


O your Servant Mr. Loveby; I question not Sir, but by this, what with your
soft melting words, and the powerful Rhetoric of your bewitching tongue, you
have wrought the young Lady to a Compliance


Faith, Madam, you are all so Cruel, and wilfully obstinate, that a man can no
more hope to bring you to a Treaty, then the Grand Signior the Emperor, after
his many and signal victories


A Soldier of Fortune as you are, must not always expect Success to wait upon
his Arms; though doubtless your victories are more Considerable, then your
defeats


Your Beauties may boast it, Madam; but we in this Lottery of Cupid find an
hundred blanks, for one prize


But you men of Courage and perseverance, weary out Fortune, and force her to
be kind, and then you trumpet out your Conquests to the whole World


True Madam; fortune may wheel about at last; but the prize we get is often too
mean to defray the Expenses we havs been at, in the prosecution of it: and were
it worth our concealing, like a politic winning Gamester, we should go off
without the least mention of our success


Was she so Inquisitive say thou?


Yes Sir, and in such a melting plyant humor, you might have molded her into
what shape you pleased


Could I gain so Considerable a treasure as you Madam? discretion, as well as
self-Interest, would bribe me to Secrecy


Heavens what do I see? my friend courting my Mistress, in my supposed absence?
his I find is like the common freindship of the world, that always bends to
the Interest of his passion


What damned ill luck's here now? Fortune plays at cross-purposes with us, I
think


Your Haggard Love, flys at all games.


Madam, a small encouragement from you, would lure me back, and teach me to
follow a constant Quarry; and then should my flame, like that of lamps, shut in
an Urne


Pardon me Sir; when once you come to your flames, and your Similies it is time
to leave you


I can no longer bear this killing sight; I Will disturb 'em: Madam, you --


God's Death Sir, are you distracted? --

For heavens sake stay and see the Event first; This may prove nothing but an
harmless piece of gallantry


I know it cannot be; for none can look on that face and not love.


Let me beg you coolly, to Consider on it within; If he discovers himself, all is
ruined; then shall I be stripped and sent naked into the wide world, -- but not
without the Discipline of an hunting-whip, besides pumps and Blankets, do so
run in my head: Sweet Master, retire


If I go not quits with you and your minnion.


Why what a damned, outrageous senseless Coxcomb is a suspicious Lover; Now
does he fancy his horns are budding out already; -- Heavens grant things fall
out luckily, but these plaguey Plumps and Blankets, will not out of my head yet


A delicate Creature, every way agreeable; But though this has most wit, yet the
other has most Innocence; and I Am sure equal glories of a face; This may cost
me as long a Seige as Troy did the Greeks; and besides, I would not basely
wrong my absent friend, The other may be won with less expense of time; -- But
pox, I never approach her but my thoughts are palled with frightfull Matrimonys


Fools are plenty, I find, they come in Couples:


What pieces of pageantry have we here? A brace of Asses in guilt trappings: I
dread the sight of a fool as much as that of an old Mistress; his presence is
far more Intolerable

Sr. John comes to Florella, Dulhead following,
Imitating and bowing, very awkardly.

Pardon me dear Madam; that I thus rudely intrude into your privacy, without
giving you notice of my approach


Very fine Udsfoot:


O fie Sr. John you make me blush, really.


Madam, your blushes add new Beauties to that face, which before had Charms
enough to confound all Mankind; -- There I was the beau Espirit: I Gad, I
could not avoid being witty: your pardon Lady --


It Is easily granted; you are so seldom guilty of that fault:


I shall leave you and my Cousin here together, to treat about this affair,
your acceptance of his Address has given me the glimps of a pleasure that I
shall esteem, the blessing of my whole life: I have provided the Fiddler; and
I Will beg leave Madam that things may be in order


Get thee gone for an eternal Coxcomb; -- Here Is this other fool stands like a
mortal wrote in Finsied Ginger-bread; -- Only that is much the better spark of
the two. Your Servant Sir


Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars; I am yours forsooth; how do you like me now? Am
not I taring fine


Awkard fool.


Pardon me dear Madam, etc. --


Dull Echo of affectation and nonsense;


I shall come to Confound her presently --


O Extremely Sir; you may be sure.


Then Madam, I say the acceptance of his address -- Udsneaks, I think I Am
almost out, -- of this address -- The glimps I Esteem; -- Sun, Moon, and seven
Stars, I think I Am our I fags; -- You know my meaning forsooth


As well as if you had spoken it out.


I Will make amends for it in the next: Your blushes add new beauties to that
face; And therefore Confound you and all mankind. Sun, Moon and Seven Stars,
how do you like me now forsooth? I think I Have tickled you off, Udsfoot


So, so, he is drawn off to the Lees, and all is out at last: now will he be as
mute as a Turk in the presence of the Grand Signior; or if he chance to speak,
'twill be like a Country-Clock, once in an hour; though not so much to the
purpose


How do you like me now forsooth? I warrant that Gown and petticoat Cost a
woundy deal of money; -- Sun, Moon and Seven Stars -- how do you like me now?
-- Can you swim forsooth


A very pertinent question to a woman; -- I Will swear you have a very pleasant way
of courting


Ay forsooth; I hate to talk of nothing but love:


A man is so put to it there; to hunt for fine expressions and soft Amorous
Speeches


Now you talk of hunting; we have the finest pack in the Country, brave
Musical deep-mouthed Dogs; -- Udsfoot -- I love hunting woundily; you shall
hear me hunt the whole pack


This is dismal, the noise of a pewterers shop, a Bell-frey, or Paper-mill,
would be very silence to this


Is not this pleasant forsooth? Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars, how do you like me
now? -- Now forsooth you shall hear me Imitate the particular yelpings of every
Dog: This is Kill-buck: Now here is sweet-lips: here is Ringwood. And here is my
Bitch Venus at last: Udsneaks, she opens as sweet as your Ladyship


Sr. I beg your pardon I use so much familiarity with you, upon the slender
acquintance I have with your person


A well-bred, well-spoken Lady, I fags.


Now must I be struck deaf again, if I stay with the Larum of her perpetual
tongue


Madam, I am ashamed to see you use the Gentleman at this Scurvy rate; I
overheard your jears


Sun, Moon, and seven Stars; I scorn to take an affront of any Lady in
Christendom --


He Will beat me anon. --


I observed your proud disdainful looks; your Indifferent behavior -- Your
Servant sweet Sir.


A parlous woman Udsneaks.


It Is well known, Madam; I Have had as many Servants as any Lady between this and
Tweed, as I may say; And I ever received 'em with all the Civility and
Ceremonies Imaginable, Seriously. You ought to respect a person of his Quality
and Education; -- Your Servant sweet Sir, your servant


She Is in the right on it Udsfoot, forsooth, if you go to that; Sun, Moon, and
Seven Stars, how do you like me now


This is not generously done, to supplant me thus; but I shall leave you to
feast upon your happiness, and go mourn my own misfortunes


Really Sir, you're extremely well dressed. This is very rich; pardon me sweet
Sir --

This is a very fine Lace; -- pray what might this Suit Cost?


I fags I cannot tell, forsooth; But it cost a power of money forsooth; Sun,
Moon and Seven Stars


Seriously my Lord Modish had just such another suit on, of all the World, when
he first made his Court to me


How greedily does she feed on those nauseous scraps of Love? A stale Maid,
will Catch at any Fool, rather then lead Apes in hell


Leave the rest to my Management; -- I Will spring the Woodcock, I le warrant you.


Dear Sir, pardon me; -- I must leave you, -- Extraordinary Business calls me
aside, Sir, -- You Are the only Person I could love to Converse with, in the
whole Town seriously; your servant sweet Sir, Dear Sir


How now Toby; how now Toby? Am not I woundy fine; -- Sun, Moon, and seven
Stars how do like me now


You outshine all the Town-sparks, and they will make you the Model and Pattern
of all your gallantry


Will they so? they count me a fool mun Toby, they count me a fool.


And they are much in the right on it --


Mollify a little, Sir; be not so hard-hearted.


Who I Toby? I hard-hearted? I scorn her words: I Am as good a natured fellow
as lives, If I Am pleased, that I am. Tell her, I can forgive her: How do like
me now, Primrose? how do like me now?


Faith Sir,; I Have the prettiest thing come into my head, just now.


What is it Toby? what is it?


It Is a humor Sir, you would top to a hair.


If it be a humor, let me alone for a humor; I Am old Dog, at a humor, Toby.


O dear Sir; My Lady is strangely taken with pretty odd humors: She Will dye with
laughing at you, Sir


You know Sir, your Cousen Sr. John has provided an Entertainment; now I Have a
disguise for you


Say no more, let us about it, let us about it. I shall make special sport

Toby: Come, come, Sir, 'twill be very taking I warrant you.


This Olio of humors, will afford us an excellent feast of Mirth; we shall
laugh our belly's full; Bless me! here comes Waspish to contribute to it; I Will
raise a tempest in him, Immediately


Mortgages, Mortgages; Bonds, Bonds, Bonds; very well I protest; O,
Udsbodykins, here are the writings of my Estate proper; let me see, -- Florry,
-- my pretty little Florry. Udsbodykins would I were at my my 20th. year again


I Will quickly put you in another tune, Sir.


Snoons, what is this? who is it? Snoons the Devil; I Am abused; Villains,
Theives, help Murder, murder


Have I caught you, have I caught you fury? Snoons, forgive Mrs Florry -- I Will
hang my self; Snoons, Snoons


Why wench, thou have used him unmercifully: He roared as loud as Perillus in
his Brazen-Bull


Pray Madam, let us remove this fool; -- I have as great an Antipathy against an
old fool, as some persons have against Cheshire-Cheese, or a breast of mutton;
-- I Am ready to swoon at the sight of him


On peril of my displeasure Sir, let him alone.


Go fetch the fiddles in. --


Ay, upon my Maker will I joy; and dance all the way.

Ay by my Shoul, you must not come in, my Master did but send for the Fiddles
look thee --


Sing the Song I ordered you.


Strephon the brisk and gay,
Young Strephons Natures wonder,
Whose eyes let forth, bright flames of Day,
Whose every look does Souls betray,
Or splits an heart asunder.
Strephon has every Grace,
And wears 'em still about him,
The Nymph whose greedy eye does trace
The Swarming Beauties of his face,
Yields heavens no heaven without him.
Who views his Miene or Air,
The lovely youth Confounds her,
He is so Charming, and so fair,
The heedless virgin Unaware,
Plays with the darts that wounds her.
Madam, there are some persons, that can answer the Character.


Come thou hither; second-hand fin'ry.


How now Impudence; why sure I Am not fallen so low in the esteem of mankind as
not to be thought the fitter person to Dance with a Gentleman; -- Sir your
servant, I hope I may Claim the privilege of your hand


Pardon me Madam; I profess I did not see your Ladyship; Otherwise I should
have taken care to have avoided you --


No excuse Sir; I Am satisfied 'twas an oversight: Your servant sweet Sir.


They say jealousy is quick-sighted; -- and sees with as many eyes, as Argus
did, -- I Will observe every nod, smile and glance, that passes between 'em --


Some Groom or Footman dressed up to amuse us; Kick the Unseasonable, Rascal
out, -- his mirth is dull





Seriously; I blush to see the Gentleman so far barbarously used; -- I Will
Immediately after him, and give him to understand, how your Ladyship derides
him


Madam, I hope you will pardon the Confidence of a stranger, If his Curiosity
leads him to take a view of those perfections that all the world admires


Sir, I Am very Certain; there are many thousand of a Contrary Opinion to your
self. I cannot but wonder at the strength of your Imagination, that could so
suddenly create those perfections you speak of


Pretty little one, why do you shun me thus? You fly me as a trembling Fawn
would a Tiger, or a Lion. I do not pursue you to make a prey of you, but to
love and embrace you


Indeed now I do not know what you mean by your fine words, But such a brave
Gentleman as you, cannot love me sure


You need not question the possibility of it, when you have already taken
possession of my heart


I Confess Madam, I have given my faith to a young Lady already; but now I must
blame my ill Stars they did not first guide me to your Ladyship


O Sir, they were not such blind guides, they saw better things for you.


O Gemini, I cannot endure you should do so; You make me blush that you do --
Let go my hand, or I vow I Will scratch you


'Twill be policy now to retreat, and not to tempt my fortune too boldly; It Is
in Woman's nature to shun those that fly them -- Cupid is very Powerful, should
I discourse longer with you, I should turn Rebel to my first flame, and then
you might as well suspect I would be false to you too


Would you put in practice the former, I Would put the latter to a venture, and
believe you, though I were deceived by my Credulity


Have you any thing to do with that Lady, Sir?


Some small business only to require the Restoration of an heart.


The Lady Sir, is a propriety.


I have hopes to the Contrary.


Unhand her Sir; I wear a Sword:


So do I Sir; in honor of this Lady.


Fie Gentlemen, do not render your selves guilty of so great a Solecisme in good
manners, as to offer to draw in company of Ladys


You may hear from me.


My Sword Sir, stall answer you.


Thus will I deal out my Love to you eternally; and to you alone --


Conceited Fool; he is grown as old in foppery as in years. He has not heat
enough to melt the Snow that lies on's head


And I dare swear Madam, he will sooner stand in need of a Nurse himself, then
give any Lady an Occasion to use one --


Doubtless Sir; I were over-happy, were I but assured of your Constancy.


Did all the tempting Beauties, Jointly strive to seduce me; by heavens Madam,
they should not draw me to a disloyal thought


I long to be rid of this fool*


I wait on you Madam, -- But I would first inform you, that I purposely
Contrived this match, that you might enjoy the freedom of Love without the
Scandal that generally attends our married women; And besides I have always
had a greater respect to your birth; and your own particular person, then to
make the dishonorable offers of keeping to so noble a Lady

Keeping's grown vulgar; Matrimony dull,
Be you my Mistress then --

And you my Fool,
Keeping of fools too, is quite out of fashion
Yet such a one's a gentile Recreation.

HOw liked you my Gull Sir?


I received I confess an unexpected pleasure and satisfaction from thy
Improvement of the Blockhead; he was too dull a fool to move laughter before


O Sir; Did you but conceive how I wear this brain away in your service, from
whence Inventions hourly work out like froth from new-bottl'd Ale; but I Am a
man of few words Sir, of few words


No more of this; but do you hear, as you hope to continue in my favor, do you
go on to expose him in so many Ridiculous shapes and changes, that she may
despise and scorn him, though he could jointure her to both the Indies


Whereupon I immediately make to my property; possess him with an opinion of
his last performance; and so draw him into greater absurdities: But Sir, --


Be gone; I Will hear no more.


And put false bills of account upon you; till by my Industry, I Am possessed of
the better part of your Estate; and stand in Competition with you, in point of
precedence, and of being thought the better Gentleman


You Will go --


I fly, I fly, Sir: etc.


And how did you find your Mistress? Is she not as I told you, Yielding upon
Terms of honor think you


O she was in a melting temper; -- But I Have so Unjustly and Scandalously abused
her in my Sham-letter, that if she discovers me I Am discarded for ever


You had best betray your self to her, by your unmanly fears; like a Murderer
that delivers himself into the hands of Justice


Certainly my ill Genius set me on writing it, what a madness was it else, to
wound the darling of my Soul; the best and tenderest part of my self; but what
doubles my griefs, is to find my friend perfidious at last


Pardon me Sir, If I differ in opinion from you in that. I Am persuaded the
Gentleman is as far from being perfidious, as your Mistress from giving him an
occasion of being so


I perceive you're bribed to speak for him, by your Love.


Were it so; I need not be ashamed to own my flame.


Take care Dorinda, his tongue has a Charm in it; and though he has the face of
an Angel, and the shape of an Cherubin; yet his black swollen heart within may
be filled with rapes, treacheries, and dark designs


You do ill to accuse your friend, before you know him guilty.


I could wish I had not too just an occasion to suspect him; But I shall take
some measures as well to clear my doubt, as to Justify or Condemn the
honorable thoughts you conceive of him


I know not to what Extravagances his jealousy may hurry him; But if he aims at
his life, he strikes at it through mine. O Loveby, Mr. Loveby; there is not a
letter in his, name but has a Charm in it


I am deceived, or I heard the name of Loveby; and know it must proceed from
her mouth, for softest Airs of Music attended the sound: why all this coldness
and scorn in your face on a sudden? pretty little one


O living dear, you always steal upon a body, and do so fright me.


It Is strange, Madam, that I should be so dreadful that at the sight of me,
you should be filled with such frightfull apprehensions: I have no swinging
long tail, horns and Cloven-feet


Indeed now I Will not stay with you, if you talk of such ugly things.


Prettyest Creature, Dearer to me then my own eyes, I Will speak to thee in
gentle accents, soft as those of Lovesick Virgins, breathing out their Souls
in tenderest expressions, and caress you gently, as the Morning-dew falls on
the opening Rose, or the fleece of snow on the bosom of the cold vale


O Gemini! I vow now you say such pretty things of all the world as Mr.
Bellamore did, when he converted me first


And dear little Lady, why may not they have the same effect?


Indeed now, I cannot tell forsooth Sir, You ^ake me blush.


Pretty Modesty --


O living dear, I would not stay any longer with you, for a World, should Mr.
Bellamore come and see you, he would kill you, indeed now -- and I am so afraid he
should kill you


Kindly feared Nay, dearest, you must pardon me, if I hasten thus to enjoy my
happiness: There Is no one but would arrive at Heaven as soon as he could


Indeed now, but if you will go to Heaven, you must dye first.


And that I could an hundred times for you, had I so many lives, was I sure but
to pass the last few transitory minutes in your dear arms


O Leminies! I wonder you are not ashamed to rumple ones Clothes so.


Oh horrid base persidious Villain; Monster of Falsehood:


Nay, your Ladyship may partly thank your self for it. As you tender your
quiet, Reputation, and Honor, Madam, I beg you would bridle your passion


Madam, your Servant; you have an angry Cloud settled on your brow; whence does
it proceed


I cannot look upon you, Sir, but I think on the Cursed Cause of it.


I hope forsooth you're not angered with me; I Will go and see after Mr.
Bellamore and tell him, that I will


I Will after her, I must not allow her time to cool again. --

Madam, I Am sorry to see you thus discomposed; and am much more so, to find
the sight of me, should be any way the cause of your discontent


Did you observe with what Indifferency he left you, Madam?


Fortune has debarred me from the Conversation of witty Men and set me up the
mark of Fools; she baits me with Apes and Monkies, and I Have no sooner shook off
one, but a fresh one flys on me with all the fury Imaginable


So, so, now the wind rises.


And they fasten on me by turns, with noise, Impertinence, or dull insipid
humors, which they take for wit: Methinks I hate all mankind for thy sake,
perjured Craftmore; Oh that I had thee here; I Would tear thee in pieces, thus,
false-hearted Traitor


There Is a way to be revenged, could you think on it, Madam? -- Think on
Revenge, -- Revenge is sweet, Madam. There are other Men in the World, as
Proper, Beautiful, and Rich as he, every whit


Thou have put a strange thought in my head; -- Here Is one Mr. Bellamore in
this House, Servant to Dorinda


So, so, now is all this blustering over, and she is veering to another quarter.
Had she as many Lovers, as there are points in the Compass, she'de run 'em all
over in half an hour --


What thin'st thou of him Wench?


O Madam, He Is a sweet-tongu'd Gentleman, he would ravish any woman alive.


Do think it is feasible.


Then his limbs are so exactly formed, so smooth and plyant, you would swear they
were made in Wax. There are Legs, Arms, Shoulders, and a body straight as an
Arrow

This sets her a-gog.


I am resolved to try my chance -- Could we but contrive to put Dorinda on
Loveby, my passage were clear. I Will presently into the Garden, where we may be
private and discourse him about it


It succeeds I Will warrant you, Madam -- Vastly Rich they say, of a great
Family, and an Education equal to both. Never fear, no veins of flint grow in
his heart


I have resolved what to do; -- I Will send him a kind Note; wherein I Will
signify that a certain Lady has a passion for him. And see how he entertains
that, and make my advances accordingly


My very thoughts, Madam; something may be learned from his Man -- seem you
nothing concerned: Entertain all your fools as before, my life for it you have
your design


One can no sooner speak of a Fool; but he is at hand:


I warrant you forsooth; you took me for a fool, I Am a man of no humor --


How Insipid is the most diverting Coxcombs, when we have distempered minds,
like meats to sick pallats they are all tastless

Sir, you will spoil the humor, by making it too common.


Madam, Compose your self; and don't let slip the satisfaction you may receive
from the performances of so complete a Blockhead: Folly after discontent is a
sweetning relish, after a bitter potion


Forsooth, don't you remember a strange person in an odd sort of habit but now;
that was I forsooth; I warrant you did not know me. But observe, if you hear or
see any one speak or do any thing, and all the Company laughs, to be sure
that is I forsooth, that is I


Incorrigible fool.


Madam, you drive the humor too far.


Nay, If you go to that, there be those that can value themselves, Udsfoot, I
can be as touchy as another, that I can; Sun, Moon, and seven Stars how do you
like me now? Farewell to you Udsneaks, if you go to that


Rascal, Dog, If you cannot lie for your daily bread, I Have done with you; let
me not have you making four faces like a jugler Swallowing knives, put on your
praying face: The Demureness of your looks will Sanctify a lie


O Conscience, Conscience, this Master of mine will damn me, that is for Certain.


Chreesh't blesh thy shweet faish; I will lie for tee joy, what shall I lie for
tee


You cannot now, Madam, let sullen discontent sit on your brow, when you have
so many ridiculous objects before you, to dissolve you into laughter; -- So,
now it begins to clear up again --


Madam, some Extraordinary business maliciously detained me from the prospect
of so much gallantry; some few short visits I Have paid; and let me dye if I
could have rescued my self from the Importunities of the fondlings, but upon
urging my engagements to your Ladyship

Dog; Remember --


You grace me with your favors, and dazzle me with all this bravery; -- You're
extremely proper, really Sir; -- Tynsy'd Ass --


Several persons of quality at Court, think it no discredit to their wit and
parts in the mystery of dressing to imitate me


Pardon me Sir; If I am too curiously bold.

Indeed this is very fine.


A trifle bestowed on me by a Duchess I danced with lately at Court.


O I will lie now Immoderately; forgive me sweet Conscience; Sir there is a
Lady, -- true; there is an Equivocation --


Did not I Command you Rascal to deny me to all that inquired after me? Her
business, Lodgings, and her name


O lo, O lo; why there it is again; -- why there it is now; -- One Madam
Cleverwit, that lodges at Mr. Draper-wells, over against the Royal Exchange;
-- O, I lie, I lie, I lie; --


Ay by my Shoul and Shaint Patrick; I will go she if thou dosh't lie for my
mashters shweet sake; if thou dosht not, I will make beat on thy fathers Child,
look tee dear joy. --


Excellent sport --


Let me not detain you from the Arms of your Mistress, All the Ladys I find,
make their Court to you


They Are all beneath my Consideration; -- No Madam, since my Conversation with
you, I nauseate their despicable amors; -- I Will redeem my stray heart; and
divorce me from their Cheap Vulgar Love; and the Circle of your Arms shall be
to me, that of the whole world; -- Go on Rascal, do you stick


I will not hope it; -- This Crevat Sir, Is point de Venice, the work is high,
and the flower very agreeable


A slight piece to appear in at the Playhouse, or so: An Italian Lady
presented me with one worth six of it


Mercy on me, no Equivocation: -- I will lie abundantly; have patience with me
good Satan --


Improbable Sham, this is a present from himself to himself.


I was almost worried as I came hither, have patience sweet Beelzebub --
Conscience


This is extravagantly ridiculous.


A fourth begs and Entreats me: In short, Sir, they are grown so troublesome, I
cannot go about your business for 'em -- O lo, O lo, there all is out; I have
discharged my Conscience


By my Shoul joy I did run to de plaish dear over against de great plaish,; And
I did ask after de Laady, but tere wash no such Laady, by my shoul thou disht
lie very much well for my Mashters shweet sake


Blund'ring fool, who sent you on this Errand? Madam, he has mistaken the
place, you may find by the account he gives; Dull, Incorrigible sot


Upon my Shalwation, now I shwear by my Maker, and by him that made me, and by
the Devil take me too, tou dosh make beat on poo


Much good it may do me.


I shall leave you forsooth; If you go to that, Udsfoot: I am a Person that
understand how to take an affront: Sun, Moon, and Seven Stars; how do you like
me now? I shall leave you Udsfoot, if you go to that


O me! what did he say? what a trembling seized my heart, oh, oh, -- will he
leave us


What means this?


He is distasted Sir, at some words I dropped unawares.


Fool wounds deep forsooth, with men of my temper.


You must bear with such petty affronts, I have been called a thousand Fops,
Fools, and Asses by Ladies e're now: Come; you must be reconciled to her


I am woundy good-natured: I can forgive you forsooth: how do you like me now,
Cousen Sr. John


Madam; I perceive the Ass is fickle; and he may disappoint our long expected
joys by his folly; -- I Will take order the writings be drawn, and all things in
readyness for the Solemnity: -- please you to walk dear Madam


Dear Sir; I thought you was going to deprive us of your good Company, and
leave me here, to mourn your absence


No, no; I Am reconciled Sweet Lady.


Sweet Lady; -- A fine spoken Gentleman, that word has Revived me; -- I wonder
at the ill breeding of Mrs. Florella, to abuse a Gentleman of your quality,
worth, wit, and Beauty


Of my worth, wit, and Beauty; Udsfoot she understands me I find.


That Is more then ever you your self did --


Sir, I protest, of the number that ever made Love to me; (and I Will warrant
I Have had an hundred) you're the only person I could ever fancy


Udsfoot, this face has been doated upon by fine Ladies, forsooth, I must tell
you


Oh Dear Sir, I Am Convinced of that by my own affections: But as I was saying,
you're the only Gentleman I admire; though I confess my Lord Sparkish was a fine
person: Sir Tymothy Long-Title had his peculiar graces too; Dear Sir, you have an
Extraordinary white hand, and your fingers are so like Sr. Thomas True-Shapes,
seriously


So, now there is another blaze of her passion; it rises by sits like a wasted
Candle when it is burned to the snuff


But here comes my Engine; -- I must withdraw. --

Dear Sir your Servant, Servant sweet Sir.


O Toby! how is it Toby; Did not I humor the business to a hair just now? Sun,
Moon, and seven Stars, how do like me now Toby


Faith Sir, I was ready to split my sides at you. Did you not observe how all
the Company laughed as soon as you appeared


My Cosen Sr. John was angry with me for it; But he is a fool man: He does not
understand an humor Udsfoot


Have you found his Equipage where I laid it out for you.


Yes, yes; begin, and I Will second you.


Sir, you may think your pleasure of my Lady, but I can assure you she admires
you for your shapes; and she is always running 'em over: and praising 'em to her
self, though she says you are something gross


He Is a little Corpulent; but that is easily remedied; I Will undertake to make
you less by 3 Inches in a quarter of an hour: It would not be amiss if your
ears were pared a little


Sun, Moon, and seven Stars, my ears Toby? why, they are not Asses ears; no,
no; but I care not, If I be taken less by 2 or 3 Inches


The Gudgeon bites.


I Will do it for you, Immediately Sir; Come please you to uncase a little.


Draw in your breath Sir, -- Very well -- I Will warrant you this will do it.


Why Toby; Udsfoot thou will squeeze my ribs flat: oh, oh, oh: Udsfoot I shall
not be able to fetch breath presently. Thou have taken me in above 2 Inches, O,
O, O, what a pox do mean Toby? slack a little; I shall never be able to
endure it, O, O, O


Nere fear't Sir, -- He begins to come to 't; -- here is a shape now; here is a
wast, Clean and slender, -- as a Mast-pole --


I believe my Lady is bigger round -- A delicate shape on my word.


Come Sir, we have but four holes more; patience Sir; patience:


O, O, O! Udsneaks Toby, I think I begin to leak at the lower End, O, O, O,
hold, hold, hold, my heart will leap out at my mouth, If thou go one hole
farther.


An 'twere Sparagus, I can see you grow: May I never hang pendant in Ladies ear
more, If I think you have your fellow in the three Kingdoms


Uh, Uh -- Toby, what do mean? O, O, O!


Have patience Sir, you will quickly master this; If I had a mind to 't, I could
draw you through a Gold Ring, like an Egg steept in Vinegar; come Sir, I Will
bate you a hole or two; So, now I know it sits easy


Thou have Crampt him I faith


Now we are gone so far Sir; we I set another humor on foot, what say you?


I was just thinking on it Udsneaks; --


What think you then of Personating a despairing Lover before your Mistress; I
have a willow-Garland ready for 't, And a Copy of Verses so pat to the purpose,
'twill be admirable, Sir, 'twill be admirable


Udsneaks, O, O, O, -- so 'twill: But I fear I shall never be able to Compass
it, for as I Am a Gentleman, I could never endure a written hand in my life, --
O, O, O


Leave that to my Instructions; Come let us in and practice.


I shall be apt, Toby; I shall be apt; O, O, O, there was a twinge: Sun Moon
and 7 Stars, how do like me now Toby? how do like me now


Excellently well Sir, along, along:


Senseless Idiot! well; this must needs prove very pleasant; I Will not discover
it to my Lady, the surprise will make it much more diverting


Bless me! here comes the old angry Baboon, his fit's not over yet; this
beating of his Mistress, sticks in his stomach still

O Unfortunate, Unfortunate; Snoons, Snoons, I Will hang my self, Cut my throat,
drown my self; No a little Rats-bane or Sublimated Mecury, Snoons Unfortunate,
oh, -- oh! -- Let me see -- O Mrs Prim, stand my friend Mrs Prim, not a word
yet Mrs Prim. --


Now to make this Scene completely Comicall, what device Shall I have? O! I
have thought on 't -- Sir: I doubt it is beyond my power to Reconcile my Lady,
she vows never to see your face again: Oh if you had but heard the wishes she
uttered 'twoud have made you tremble


Oh, oh! Do not let me hear 'em then; 'twill be the Death of me, oh, oh!


There Is one way left yet; -- Come Sir, be pacified. You talked but now of
hanging your self; would you be ruled by me you should Counterfeit the thing;
and so exactly; It should turn more to your advantage then you dream of


Udsbodikins, say you so Mrs Prim. any thing, Mrs Prim. any thing; But how may
it be done


Why look you; it is but to be hung by the Armpits; holding your head a little
on one side; pulling your handkercheif over your face: struggling, kicking, and
heaving a little


Udsbodikins; It must needs melt her into Compassion.


Then come I; Scream out as affrighted, cut the Rope, Chafe and rub you; and
give you some Spirits, pretending to fetch you again; The Garden door will be
the fittest place, because my Lady's now there; she will be sure to see you Sir


A pretty Contrivance, I protest, A very pretty Contrivance; This must needs
work upon her; -- Come, come, Mrs Prim


And Madam; may I firmly rely on what you say?


As on your Creed Sir, She Is strangely enamored of you; She was infinitely
taken with you this morning in the Park, and since, I have overheard her
talking of you to her self, like an Usurer, recounting his darling Sums


Upon this Assurance, Madam; I Will push my designs on more vigorously: But I
fear the little Baggage will be talking to me of that Bug-bear-Matrimony;
should she put it home to me; I should be apt to play the Fool, and take the
marriage bit into my mouth, if I could not prevail otherwise


O fie Sir; I hope your designs are honorable, upon this Condition I promise
you my assistance: But otherwise, I utterly disclaim it; She Is an Heiress, and
has a plentiful Estate I hear


Is not the first Fortune has been stoll'n you would say.


She came this way, and the privacy of the place will allow me the opportunity
of disclosing my Passion more freely: If she seems cold, which my last
Interview confirms me almost she will not; I can fall off as fast as she; or if
she offers to make it public or expose me, I can deny it every word: Ha!
Sdeath, Loveby! I am Confirmed now he is false


Faith, Madam, I cannot despair of success, Influenced thus by the
Encouragement and assistance of your Ladyship: You Will be faithful and constant
to your fair promises; -- your Servant Madam: --


So, he is sure, -- and now he is devoted to my Service. By this means I shall be
Revenged of that base faithless, black-mouthed Libeller


I Will Crush this monster Loveby, or loose my life in the attempt. Friendship I
find is an Aerie notion, that never had any other Existence, then in a few
letters, the decoy of fools, by which they are wheadl'd into a belief of the
integrity of those very men that intend to prey upon 'em


This is an happy opportunity; I Am resolved I Will take the advantage of an
Innocent freedom


Hold! Yet this Charge may be rash and groundless; I Will try my fortune; but
first, down swelling heart -- z.


But the approach of you Sir, guilds my face with smiles, and drives away all
those Clouds you speak of, 'twou'd be as impossible to be sad in your presence,
Sir


As for a man not to be in Love in yours, Madam.


I shall not be so vain, as to think you speak the real Sentiments of your
mind, since I understand your Love is all disposed of already, to one who has
greater Charms and merit, to recommend her to it


This is strange and unexpected, she gives ground apace; this seems to suit
with the purport of her Billet. But both perhaps may be forged, on purpose to
make me discover my self; but I must believe her when it is my Interest to do so
--


I see by your grave Consideration you begin to repent the Charges of your
Complement, and the least intimation of your Dorinda, has soon brought you back
to her arms


Madam, I confess there are some small obligations between us; But your
Ladyship might lay far greater on me by honoring me, with the Title of your
Servant


The request is so modest, I shall not deny it.


By heavens I Am Conqueror at last; I have now the alluring prospect of all
earthly Joys before me, and a few gentle steps, will bring me to the Enjoyment
of 'em; I am come now to somewhat of a knowledge of my self; and am fully
Convinced, I have wronged both my Mistress and my Friend.


you Remember the tone.


Udsfoot Toby: I Will tune 'em I warrant thee.


Go on Sir, yonder she is; How he moves along, as stiff as though he was in a
Case of Wainscot


What have we here? O'tis Toby's Machine.


reads.

A Willow-Garland thou did send
Perfumed last day to me;
Which did but only this Portend
I was forsook by thee.
Sun, Moon, and 7 Stars; how do you like me now forsooth?


What Is this? the Pageant of a forsaken Lover, Madam? I wonder you could be so
hard-hearted, to drive such a handsome witty Gentleman into despair, ha, ha, ha


Since so it is, I tell thee what,
To Morrow thou shall see, O, O, O.
Me wear the Willow, after that
To dye upon the Tree.

O my Conscience it is Dulhead; 'Twere pity Sir, but you should be, as good as
your word


As beasts unto the Altars go,
With Garlands dressed, so I
Will with my willow wreath also,
Come forth and sweetly dye. O, O, O.

The Psalm's ended.


If he would but come to the Execution now.


Do you know me forsooth? Sun, Moon and Seven Stars how do like me now? Was my
Cousen Sr. John here now, he would think some body put this into my head now, O, O,
O. I Will find him out, and show him the humor, and make him wonder at my
Invention


Madam, please you to walk this way: A very pleasant Garden: We are now in a
kind of Paradise


Udsfoot, what is here? has Waspish hanged himself? I warrant if he is found out
he will be tried for his life; I saw a pure Watch he had to day: I Will borrow it,
till he has occasion for it again, O, O, O. First let me try whether he is Compos
Mentis or no


Theives, Theives, I Am robbed, Murder, Murder.


O, O! Ghost I defy thee, O, O, I shall be hanged that is certain: Udsfoot I Am
dead, I Am dead; Ghost I defy thee, O, O, O


The noise came this way --

Ha! here is the old Gentleman hung up like Erasmus, between Heaven and Hell;
See how he twirles round like a Sparrow roasting at the end of a packthred; ha,
ha, ha


I Am confident this is my woman's Roguery.

How she has tortured the poor old fellow!


Come Sir, I Will save you from the Gallows for once; If you will not make good
an old Proverb, and cut my throat for'


Snoons; -- I Will hang you all -- O my disgrace, O my shame, -- Udsbodikins,
I Will e'n fall sick of the fullens, go to bed and dye with grief, snoons, I will


O Madam the strangest News.


We have seen your device already.


It Is not that I mean, Madam; Do you know that Gentleman? It Is Mr. Craftmore.


Am I betrayed --


The very same of my Conscience wench, ha, ha, ha! how came thee to find it
out


Madam, I intercepted this letter by Chance; please you to read it, it is
directed to him: Mr. Loveby I hear has given out that he is returned from
travel


O this negligent Rascal, my Cormorant; and am I betrayed by my Friend too?

What means this unreasonable laughter?


Your unreasonable presence Sir; You may put off your disguise; poor Mr.
Craftmore; I swear you are an excellent Man at an Intrigue: Now wench the
business of the letter, and all is out


Do you see any one making Asses ears behind me, or have I a Fools Cap and
Bells on? You would persuade me I am not my self


No Sir, I would persuade you, are your self.


Well, Madam, I am the Man, if you'I have it so. -- But I was never so mistaken
in my self, all days of my life before. Do you hear Madam


Adieu Sir, Da, da. poor thing, would it have a wife?


O my damned careless Rogue, and more damned treacherous friend. 'Tho' he did
not know of my coming to Town, yet he reported it at a venture, perhaps on
purpose to further his own designs -- Distraction, Distraction, Hell and the
Devil; I shall run mad


Hey day! what is come to you now?


My hopes are all Shipwrack'd, I Am barbarously Wronged by my Slave and my
Friend


Pardon me if I think you brand his Reputation.


Ay, dote on him still: and may he be as great a plague to you as she has been
to me


Passion, passion, mere passion, and nothing else; Be advised, and hearken to
reason


Ha! what is that? and was her Innocence only pretended, and her simplicity
affected? The Sex had been amply Revenged, had she put false Dice upon me; Pox,
this is some Country-Wench of a decayed family, and crazed Reputation; -- One
that he has debauched, and now would put her off upon me, or any one that would
be fond of being ruined; -- 'Twas well I discovered her; else this Algereen
might have taken me with her false Colors, and made prize of me in faith


I cannot bear the real falsehood of a pretended friend, therefore I Will demand
satisfaction of Loveby; and if he cannot defend himself with his tongue; let
him if he dare, with his Sword


Anger is a short madness; and it is ill trusting a weapon in a Madmans hand:
Let either fall, I suffer loss, in this of a Relation; In that, which is ten
times more of a Lover: I Will try all ways Imaginable to prevent the threatening
ills; and be sure to Examine all their motions, with a Curious eye

We ought to watch those things we value most,
Since they are in danger to be soonest lost.

THe Devil's in this slippery Jade, fortune; how she juggles and plays fast and
loose with us: If I cannot bring things about again, I must even show my
threatening Master yonder a fair pair of heels; -- One of my Fools, I think I
have pretty well managed already; he was shrewdly terrified with the
apprehensions of old Waspish's proceeding against him, and posting into the
Country; whereupon for a pretended disguise I have equipt him with an old Rusty
Suit of Armor, which I accidentally met with in the house here; and he struts
about, and is as proud of it, as a new-listed foot-Soldier is at the first
putting on of his Calico-sash, and great stinking Brasshilted Sword


Hum, -- -- hum -- hum -- Toby? -- hum -- hum -- --


Oh, It does rarely Sir; only let your gate be somewhat stiffer, your steps
larger, and your head a thought higher. -- --

Admirably well Sir; Be sure you remember the terms of Art I gave you, your
words of terror, and so forth, and you are a complete Bully


Mum Budget -- I warrant thee Toby; Udsfoot I shall be a terrible fellow -- --
by Garagantua, Gog, and Magog, hea Toby, hea boy, hea


To a hair Sir, you do it to a hair; I Will leave you to your practice.


Hum! hum! Udsfoot, but if he should discover me at last, and apprehend me, he
would certainly hang me; and that would be a disgrace to me all days of my life
after -- Udsneaks, I had as good into the Country yet I think


Fanci. How, into the Country, did he say? O my misfortunes, I am lost for
ever, fall roof, and bury me quick in thy ruins --


Hum! hum!


By this dear hand, you shall not go: For upon my word that Business of
Waspishes is made up; He is pacified, and has forgiven you


Hum! hum! hum!


I am amazed both at the strangeness of his Dress and behavior, seriously --
But oh that Florella, had you heard how she abused you


Hum! Buz, Udsfoot, I shall be a woundy Bully: How forsooth; Did she so, I defy
her -- hum! hum! She takes me for a fool belike -- hum! hum


She is like the rest of the young giddy women of the Town that dote on empty
Shallow fellows, fine Clothes and mere outsides; and never Consider the inner
and nobler Beauties of the mind; and have no respect for persons of merit, such
as your self Sir


Hum! hum! An Incomparable Lady: Say I met him now; I go up to him, and run
full drive against him thus: Then I twirl his hat thrice round his head, and
give him not a word but Mum Budget: -- hum! hum


His rude Deportment Confounds me, totally, totally: Sir I perceive; I do not
engage or attract your thoughts


Hum! Hum!


Please you Sir to honor my Apartment, I can show you some small Monuments of
my former Servants favors; As a Cabinet of Ebony, the Repository of my
Jewels; a Scruto're inlaid with Ivory, and studded with Gold -- Besides some
choice pieces drawn by the best hands in Italy, with my own Picture at the
upper-end, and all presents seriously


Hum! She is woundy rich: I Will have her, though I lose my Estate by it. Toby told
me of your perfections before


Your Servant sweet Sir, you are the only person I could hope would marry me --


Udsfoot, here is my Cosen Sr. John -- he I not know me trow. I Will Bully him --
Udsneaks, I Will Bully him -- Hum! hum! hum! etc

Hum! hum!


What vulgar Rascal has been practicing upon the Insensible?


Hum! Buz!


What a pox ailes the Impertinent? -- He is Infatuated; By heavens Infatuated;
-- Blockhead will you break forth into the Solution of the Enigma


Mum, Budget -- hum! hum!


Confound the Irregular Sot, what does he mean? Hark you Sir Diego, my Don
Fungoso, --


Nay then; by Gog and Magog; Garagantua, and the twelve Champions of England:
Francanado: --


Ounds forbear; --


Passado:


What the Devil, Couz!


Palizado:


Hell and the Devil, -- why Cuz. I say, Cuz.


Slashado; --


Hold, hold, --


Parado; --


Ounds, are you mad?


Slapado.


What a pox; nay, nay, nay.


Strapado, Rapado, Bastinado.


Help, help, what a plague: -- hold, hold.


No, no; I am a Fool, a man of no humor: How do you like me now, Cousen Sr.
John? -- Passado, Strapado, Rapado, Bastinado


Nay what a Devil, hold, hold: -- prithee Couz. lay by this humor, and
surrender up thy self to attention a little: Here will be some writings
presently which you must set your hand to; the Lady expects you, and all things
are in Readyness


Mum, Budget -- No I defy her Cousin Sr. John, I defy her, I have a Lady that
is an Angel; and has a woundy deal of plate and Jewels


Confound her: I fear Fancifull has set upon him with all her noise and
affectation; she is the mother of time; and was Nurse to Eves first child


Popum Buz: Say you so Cousin Sir John, I can scarcely believe you though.


A mere toy-shop, a Change; and tells you of more Lords and Knights, that have
been her Servants, then ever were heard of since the order first came up


Then I defy her; I Would have her to know I defy her; I would not have her though
she had a heap of Gold as high as the Monument; Sun, Moon, and seven Stars how
do you like me now? Cousin Sr. John


I shall take care to secure you, lest my designs are frustrated: Riot on all
the luscious Sweets of Love


Udsfoot, this is a parlous woman: If the old puss had gotten me into her
Clutches, she would have clawed me off woundily, I fag


How is this? By what I hear, his Cousin Sir John has work't him off from the
Interest Fancifull had in him too; It must be my Business to bring him on again


Hum! hum! Mum Budget: hum!


Heavens Sir, you're fortunately met.


Why Toby, what is the matter? hea Toby!


O Sir, A Damnable plot against you.


Ha, ha, ha! Is that all poor Toby, ha, ha, ha! That this fellow should be such
a fool to think I could not smell it out, ha, ha, ha


Well Sir; you were certainly born with a caul upon your head, else my Lady
Fancifull, --


Had made a Fool of me thou think: Popum.


All mistake Sir, all mistake; Do but hear me.


I defy her Toby; I defy her; No; I am just come to the point of agreement with
Florella


That is the very thing I came to give you a Caution of: For Sir, you must know
your Cousin Sr. John has Contrived to make you sign to a Conveyance of part of
your Estate; and intends to put Primrose upon you, and marry Florella himself:
Here she is to witness it


Sun, Moon, and seven Stars, a deep design I fags; a pestilent Contrivance:
But Toby; I thought on this business my self man; -- Good wits will jump


What he has told you, is very true; upon my word Sir, But they could not win
me to so base, so treacherous an Act


'Twou'd be a Master-peice to Countermine 'em, and blow 'em up with their own
powder


Udsfoot, I was just thinking on it Toby.


Therefore the better to further your purpose, do you seem to assent to every
thing they propose: But what ever you do be sure to secure the writings in your
own hands


Udsfoot, so I will; -- Thou art a very honest fellow for this, Toby; ha, ha,
ha! I cannot choose but laugh to think how woundily I shall surprise 'em: --
Lericum twang, Buz. ha, ha, ha


So; this Business is done effectually:

If the Blunderbuss go off; I Will engage he does Execution.


No doubt on it, when he is so dangerously loaded by your worship.


Say thou so, my little Nymph-tutelar, of the Dressing-box and pomatums, my
gentle vestal 'oth Fires of Quince and Marmalade; -- this rallery so becomes
that pretty mouth of thine; that I gad Child I am so in love with it, I could
e'ne kiss it again: --


Oh dear Mr. Toby, the Constancy of your love, and the Sincerity of your
passion, cannot but oblige exceedingly


Look thee, here is a Letter; and I have Counterfeited the Superscription so
exactly, you cannot distinguish it from the true: possess thy Lady, this was a
mere forgery of thy own, and to Convince her, give her this


A goodly work, going on.


Which when she breaks open; she will find to be a blank: -- Do see Primrose,
how these yellow Boys shine upon thee like so many little Suns


I am heartily sorry, the gentlemen are come too late.


Ay do, be obstinate, and refuse; and become a Scandal to thy profession, do,
do


Well; I Will take 'em for once, that your Master may not think me so ill-bred,
as to refuse a Gentleman's kindness





To your post, to your post; yonder is my Lady; not a smile, a look, or the
least token of familiarity


Well friend, I must needs own your master is a non-parile at an Intrigue, we
may see what great advantages may be reapt from traveling; without doubt he
learned this Mystery at the French Court; it is so far out of the Common road of
Amors


Madam; what means your Ladyship?


Ha, ha, ha, poor Gentleman; he thought he lay secure under his disguise, ha,
ha, ha


Assist me once, good necessary Confidence; and blushes be as far from me, as
sneaking ill-bred Modesty is usually from a Sister of my profession:


For what? is the wench mad?


I Confess Madam; I forged this Letter but now: but 'twas only to try how you
stood affected toward Mr. Craftmore


Well said little Matchiavil; I love and honor thee for this Choice gift of
lying --


How! and durst you own it huswife!


Since 'twas Innocently designed Madam, I purposed to disabuse your Ladyship,
and beg your pardo


How could you hope I would grant it?


Upon the knowledge of the sweetness of your Ladyships temper.


Aye; tickle her there my little Cockatrice -- glibly, glibly -- stroke her
gently and betray her with a smile, do, do


And am I thus deceived, and put upon by thee too? -- Let me hear no more of
these tricks, If you dare, go to your primitive Knitting Needles


I promise your Ladyship, I shall be Cautious for the future in Cases of this
Nature


Ah, my dear little Devil; let me kiss and hug thee for this; I must confess I
was Ignorant of thy great abilities before


Sdeath Sirs what do you mean?


Now will I to my Lady, and this will Confirm her in the belief of what I told
her, and that this is not Mr. Craftmore


I beg you, by the panting Souls of those fair virgins that languish for you,
put up your Swords


Sir, you have wronged a friend of mine, and that in the highest nature; even
in the right of his love; basely, in his absence


I understand you not Sir: -- I wish I knew the Gentleman; that I might give
him personal satisfaction


Had you not once a familiarty with one Craftmore?


Yes Sir; but no one dares think I would print such eternal stains upon my
honor; as to violate so professed a friendship


Did you not attempt to Rival him in the Interest of his Love?


No Sir; upon my honor, no.


And to promote your own Amor, did you not (though you know no such thing)
spread a false Report of his return


Hell reward me if I did.


And taking this advantage of his absence; endeavor to seduce his Mistress
from him


No, Sir, no; perdition Seize me, if it ever entered into my thought.


Know Sir, then, that I am he.


Dear, dear, friend; welcome, welcome; ten thousand welcoms.


Dear Loveby forgive me. --


As freely as I hope for the pardon of my own Sins.


Upon the assurance of your pardon; I Will Inform you at a more Convenient time,
of the Unhappy cause of this Jealousy; -- this frenzy of mine; -- why I used
this disguise; -- for what reasons I sent my Cousin Dorinda hither. --


How! what an Unlucky Dog am I; now am I ashamed to look her in the Face? --


Why, she put on this mask of Simplicity, and I pretended Courtship to her.


Come Faith Ned; you was a little too blame, that you did not give Notice of
your being in Town; but to go quits with you, you must know I have had some
suspicions of you too; for when I perceived this Lady's simplicity to be
affected, I began to harbor dishonorable thoughts of you both, but now I Am
Convinced of my Error, and beg you would Intercede to her for me


You had best try your own power first, Sir.


Encouraged by you, dear Madam, I dare do much: And here I would make a tender
of my whole heart to you


O Sir; I shall not be so unreasonable to expect, that you a person so
generally received by the Ladies, can any more confine your self to one woman,
then one bottle


Madam, I confess I have been a Rover; -- But it is like those that travel far
through other Countries to come to their own; but when they are there, they fix
for ever: -- Faith Madam 'twould be a charity in you to reclaim a wild fellow


The Experiment carries so much of danger in it, I dare not venture.


I Confess at first my design was dishonorable.


And how can I be assured it is other ways now?


To give you a Demonstration of it, I would renounce my belove^ liberty, for
your sake, and venture even to marry you


And Repent it the next morning, like a raw acquaintance that has been fuddled
with you over night


Dorinda, dissemble not any longer; give him your hand.


He had my heart before.


And now friend, I have one Request to you, that you would assist me in my
love, as I have you in yours


I were unworthy else, dear friend --


How Primrose! Did you not say these Gentlemen were engaged in a quarrel?
Methinks it is a very loving one. -- This Confirms me this is Craftmore; and all
is a mere Sham you pretended but now


What a turn is here? all is unravelled again. --


Curse on ill luck, here is your Mistress; Do you lead Dorinda off, and
Immediately send me a note; wherein signify your Contempt of her, that you're
lately arrived and married to another.


Ha, ha, ha Sir, you may stay; -- ha, ha, ha! -- Well, you're two of the
quie^est Sons of Mars, I ever saw: -- Let me see: not so much as scratching of
faces; or biting of thumbs; -- prithee wench help me laugh


I must do it, lest she suspect I am in the plot against her.


Your Ladyship is in a very gay humor.


Really Sir; though I must needs own 'twas a very Considerate thing of you, to
prevent the effusion of Christian blood: --


You do not design to affront me: I shall leave you to the enjoyment of your
humor


Is one Mr. Loveby here?


Some people call me so, Sir.


Here Is a note for you Sir. --


Jack I Have been hunting after thee these two days -- there is not a Tavern has
escaped me; I lodge at my Uncle Freelands, by the Temple


You seem Concerned.


Please you to read it, I dare believe you will be so too.


But hearing you was with a Cast Mistress of mine: Florella, that I and my Lady
intend a visit within this half hour: -- Oh horrid! your faithful friend Edw.
Craftmore

Oh Inhumane Tyrant! a Turk, or a Cannibal would have treated me more civilly.
--


I cannot stay to hear you now Madam -- But faith methinks this was somewhat
cruelly done of my friend


If I be not revenged, -- But seriously I thought the Gentleman you parted from
was Mr. Craftmore


And that I presume was the cause of your laughter: it is not generous to be of
Counsel against my friend; but to serve you Madam, there is one way left yet;
do you Solicit young Bellamore; Muster up your female Arts; spread all your
nets to entangle him


I have already attempted it, and but for my folly, I had succeeded.


I can give you greater encouragement than you imagine: You know I made my
Court to Dorinda, and at last with some difficulty, I prevailed with her to
hearken to Conditions: Bellamore perceived it, and gave me a Challenge, which
upon her Entreaties I declined, and seemed to lay by all pretensions to her:
Upon this he embraced me and styled me his Friend


Now Madam, all is out; and you may find, I am Innocent.


But I only pretended this friendship, that I might the more securely deprive
him of his Mistress, so that if you win him, you make room for me, and
Craftmore will be disappointed of his Insulting Revenge


My Oracle; my better Angel.


I have some extraordinary business; and am in great have at present: Servant,
Madam


If I can but win upon young Bellamore now.


O let Mr. Loveby alone for an Intrigue; I Will lay my life Madam this takes
effect: For when he finds he is bobb'd of his Mistress, he will be as eager to
Revenge his wrongs as your Ladyship. If he boggles at Matrimony, it is but to
give him a bond of Security; and he cannot refuse to own you


So ho, ho; so ho, ho, ho -- Why Toby; Couz. Sr. John, So ho, ho, ho, ho, ho,
ho; -- Confounded Dog Toby -- Why Toby -- To -- by -- To -- by --


Is the Devil in your throat? we shall have you alarm the posse of some Six of
the Neighboring parishes, anon; and they will be charging you with rotten Eggs
and turnip-tops; -- I have been trying to force the door, but in vain; --
there is no other means for your escape, then by this friendly rope. Clap it
across one of the bars, and


Mercy on us wench; what luggage of old Iron-work? what Hero Burlesquid have we
yonder


Your humble admirer, Madam; your Country-gallant of much land Acres.


Is it that horse-load of a fool; let us stand aside a little and expect the
event of this Adventure


Udsfoot Toby, be sure hold fast: --


I warrant you, you shall come down as swimmingly as a Cat from a Tower in a
high wind, with Bladders at her feet: (Alons Monsieur


Prithee have a care, if I should chance to fall --


Your bones would make but a sorry Anatomy you'de say, away with it.


Heavens Sir, your Cosen Sir John; we must disappear -- vanish.


Udsneaks, so I will.


I kiss your fair hands, Madam.


You are in a gay humor Sir John -- What means the conceited Fop.


All things are prepared for the Solemnity, Madam: I know you need not be
directed in bestowing your favors; when there is a certain person of some
quality, whose merits justly lay claim to 'em. There Is a certain Jewel, Madam,
you wear about you, of too great worth to be soiled by fulsome dull Matrimony,
and I am convinced it is as good as lost if you bestow on one that cannot set a
true value on it. I have had the keeping of some scores of young Ladies; they
knew me for a person responsable, and fit to be trusted with the treasure: --
Confound me Madam, you must not, shall not, cannot deny me


I Will fit you for this Essence-bottle -- But I Am resolved now to carry on the
humor; John my blushes speak too much the language of my heart


I know Madam, you could not withstand my jantee Insinuating way.


Attribute it I beseech you to your Irresistible Charms, and let not my
weakness be an occasion of a Public Triumph; -- Please you to walk with my
Woman; she will conduct you where I Will instantly follow --

Dissolute Coxcomb: But I Will be even with the old Fool since he will be meddling.


I led him to my old Lady Fancifulls Chamber, and 'twas darkened to Embolden
her Squire whom she had appointed to meet there: I had planted old Waspish
under the Bed before, having possessed him, your Ladyship designed to marry him
privately; and there he lies in expectation of you, playing Bo-peep: thinking
when you appear, to surprise you with the humor


We shall have admirable sport, Wench.


I protest, she stays Immoderately, Udsbodikins my back's almost broke.


Oh I hear somebody; it must be she: Dear Madam, where are you?


Here, here Sir, softly.


My life, my Soul, my Joy: -- This is kind, where is the Bed?


O Don't talk so, good Sir, I tremble to hear you.


Confound me; I fear some old hag has practiced upon me, methinks I find an
aversion in my Love


Now whilst they are in the very height of Expectation, I Will let the light in
upon 'em -- ha, ha, ha! I shall burst with laughing


What Is here a Succubus: Old Heccuba, is it you? You must like her undergo the
Metamorphosis, if you will have your desires Satisfied


I scorn your base dishonorable Actions, but for my virtue and honor, you would
offered violence to my body, foul Ravisher


Snoons, treachery, Murder, Cursed Florella, Damned Primrose, I Am betrayed,
I Am abused, grant me patience, snoons


This is excellent Diversion, ha, ha, ha.


Foh, I shall not be sweet again these two months:


I have been gallanted by abundance of fine Persons seriously, -- But I defy
the best of them to say he ever had his beastly will of me


I hate an old fool I Gad, -- foh --


Affected old Coxcomb: I Am resolved I Will rid my hands of 'em all. Go you and
Cajole that old Fool yonder; let me alone with this


Madam, you might have picked out some easy credulous Fop to have made a Cully
of, there are fools enough in the Tow


Think you Sir, I Would expose my honor to the Censure of that Fancifull -- though I
value your love above all things; -- yet pardon me if I was so discreet as to
preserve my Reputation


Revenge is low and vulgar; know Madam, there are a thousand Beauties; sigh,
languish, burn and dye; to taste those Joys, you might have surfeited on. I Will
Immediately to my Cousin, whom I have locked up from the violent attacques of
that termagant Fancifull: But I Will now Enlarge him, and Consummate the Match
between you, and then Madam you lie at my Devotion


Snoons; not a word yet, not a word yet; I Will be Revenged, Snoons, snoons.


My Lady bad me tell you, she is extremely sorry for this Disappointment, and is
come to beg pardon


Sir, 'twas my unhappiness this unlucky accident fell out; -- But please you to
walk with me, I have a Parson within shall make me yours for ever


Udsbodikins; say you so, I protest, say you so, very well, very well -- Come
then, pretty Mrs. Florry, I Am Impatient, Udsbodikins, come, Mrs. Florry, come,
come


Udsfoot, 'twas well my Cousin Sr. John mist me: What forsooth you thought to
make a noddy of me, Udsneaks, there is old Waspish; -- I Will bully him. Hum, buzz
--


How, how, Udsbodikins what means this?


Mum Budget --


Confounded villain; he affronts me, Snoons. Let me go, Snoons, Revenge, Snoons.


Should Sr. John have met with him now, I Am lost for ever. O he is here.


Nay forsooth I must confess I was woundily in fault; but I was lock's up by my
Cousin Sr. John; and after Toby had Released me, by his advice, I scamper'd off
to secure me from him; we have plotted a woundy revenge against him Udsfoot:
and to let you know what it is; I Am resolved to marry you forsooth


Oh heavens! -- --


Udsfoot you shall not deny me; If you do I shall be terrible angry: hum, hum,
hum, Toby has procured a Parson within on purpose


Oh happy day! O promising hour of balmy pleasures; Oh how my heart throbs and
trembles with the impetuous Sallies of my blood --


Come along forsooth; I Would give an hundred pounds to meet my Cousin Sr. John
now, I could be monstrously valiant Udsfoot, hum, hum, hum! --


What, have you nooz'd your Fool?


I cannot answer positively; but by this he is in the hands of a Canonical
retailer, a Marriage-Broker; a fellow that will go through-stitch, with his
work


I expect Florella here Instantly: Yonder she is I think.


Pray heavens it prove a fit season to sow the Seed of Love


Base treacherous Villain: and am I now betrayed? was this his pretended
friendship


Faithless Inhumane Craftmore; are all his mighty Boastings come to this.
Protestations and vows were only made by him I find to be broke again: O
Faithless Deserter, who now glories in his guilt and triumphs in my wrongs


Madam; I perceive your misfortunes hold something of proportion with those of
mine


If I may believe what you have uttered; the killing Circumstances are just the
same


So, so, they begin to close; -- You're made for ever you little Dog Toby; down
on your Marrow-bones, Sirrah


Would you Contribute to the design; there might be some ways found out yet to
lessen our miseries, at least. Suppose a Lady of a plentiful fortune, and a
tolerable face, should fly to you for protection, you could not sure be so
cruel as to refuse her


She Is my own, if she hold on thus.


Pardon me Sir, if I lay by the Modesty of my Sex; -- Then I beg, I entreat you
would own me; and to secure you, take this In it is contained all that can
Entitle me to an Estate


And this Madam, you deliver into my hands, to Justify the right I have to your
Ladyship


Yes Sir.


I thank you kindly, Madam, I have Caught you at last. I faith -- now let your
faithless disloyal Lover enter


O I shall never brook the sight of him I fear:


I warrant you Madam: -- ha, ha, ha!


What mean you Sir?


Come Madam; look upon him; he is no such terrible man.


I understand you not.


I hope my fickle Mistress that neither this my disguise, nor long sickness
caused by your unkindness, nor the distant Clime to which I was banished by
your capricious humors, can have rendered me a stranger to your eyes


Oh heavens, Craftmore:


Nay, nay, humoursome Mistress; you cannot fall off now; here is my man has
overheard all


Yes, I gad Madam; and can swear bloodily up to the point.


And am I over-reach't? -- what was it blinded me thus?


Dear friend much Joy to you.


And may I not say as much to your Ladyship?


Betrayed on all sides; You may thank your Policy, or you had done penance for
the other two years


If you Command it, I cannot but obey you, Madam.


Hem, hem! -- well, this Matrimony is a most delicious, a very enlivening thing
seriously; -- hem


Gentlemen and Ladies your Servant -- I cannot find my Kinsman, Madam.


Sun, Moon, and seven Stars; how do you like me now, Couz, Sr. John?


Ha! what would the Impertinent Blockhead have? he is not tied to that Chymera;
and Madam, am I deprived of you too, and all my promised Joys? where are the
writings I trusted you with? you may keep your fool but not a groat Estate


They Are in safe hands; never stir, Cousin Sr. John: I scorn your affronts;
Marriage is honorable; how do you like me now


They may be forth coming upon weighty Considerations: Seal, sign and deliver;
--


To threescore pounds, do you hear?


Then here are the writings Sir; when you quitted your pretentions, the
Guardianship devolved upon Sir, your humble Servant


Udsfoot Toby; we have outwitted my Cousin Sr. John most woundily, hea Toby:
--


So, so, Mrs. Florry; it is very well; protest, the old Snake has Cast his Skin;
I Am twenty years younger then I was, Udsbodikins I am; You little leering,
fleering, wriggling giggling Fubs you: Come kiss me, Udsbodikins, come, kiss
your husband Mrs. Flory. --


Much joy to you, Sir; now you may go suck the sweets of your Primrose.


How, how, I protest, Snoons, Snoons, treachery, treachery, I Am undone, undone;
That Witch, Devil Florella, Carrion, Strumpet Primrose: I Will Poison my self, Cut
my throat, and leave my Estate to the King; Snoons, Snoons


This is all trick, and very pleasant In Faith.


What coupling here has been


What will you give me to Release you Sir?


Any thing in the world; make thy own proposals -- ruined, ruined.


Sign but this writing here, Sir.


Ay I protest with all my heart.


Know Sir, this was the Parson, and this is the habit, in which he married us.


You had the first fruits of my Deaconship, I assure ye Sir.


A Dog, Confounded Villain; I protest I Will put you in the Bishops Court; I Will
make you do penance for this, Snoons, snoons


Well Primrose suppose thee and I should play the fool, and commit Matrimony.


That word has a Charm in it, not to be resisted; by a poor helpless solitary
Maid


Agreed then wench; our virtuous Industry has procured us enough to rent a
single room; and may all in good time bring Mr. Toby to some reverend office in
his ward


For the service done me, I Will make your life easy to you


I thank you Sir.


Come Sir, you are not to stir till you have shook off your ill humors by a
Dance


Well Sir; you have been too hard for me at last, but it is some pleasure to
see my revenge on that brace of old Coxcombs

May all old fools, that Wedlock do Importune,
Or Sue for love, with ours find equal fortune:
And may all those that make their Lovers tarry,
Be thus Trapan'd like me and fore'd to Marry.


