OUR Bard resolved to quit this wicked Town,
And all Poetic Offices lay down:
But the weak Brother was drawn in again,
And a cast Mistress tempted him to Sin.
Thus many a cautious Gallant in this Throng,
May wed, when old, whom they debauched when young.
Thus the repenting fair Ones vow in vain
From Cards, from Love, from Scandal to refrain,
For Easter over, they relapse again.
To write well's hard: But I appeal to y'all,
Is It not much harder not to write at all?
Some Men must write, for Writing's their Disease,
And every Poet's sure one Man to please.
Some meddling Coxcombs, rather than sit still,
And perfectly do nothing, must do ill.
Some are with busy Dullness so o're-run,
They seem designed by Heaven to teaze the Town,
Yet when these Fools have spawned some sickly Play,
We have so many greater Fools than they,
They Will pack a crowded Audience the third Day.
This Poet has no sly inveigling Arts,
He Will try to gain, but he will not steal your Hearts.
His Muse is rustic, and perhaps too plain,
The Men of squeamish Tastes to entertain:
Who none but Dutchesses will daign to toast,
And Favors only from front Boxes boast.
That Is all Grimace: When Appetites are good,
Be the Dress course, the Air and Manners rude,
You can take up with wholesome Flesh, and Blood.
But he despairs of pleasing all the Nation,
It Is so debauched with Whims of Reformation.
H' has done his best: Here is no wanton Scene
To give the wicked, Joy, the godly, Spleen.
Not one poor bawdy Jest shall dare appear,
For now the battered, Veteran Strumpets here
Pretend at least to bring a modest Ear.
Here is some Love, it is true, some Noise, some War,
Enough to please the Belles, the Beaux to scare.
Some bustling Patriots too, some Rabble-rout,
And Senators of the weak side thrown out.
But in all this, here is nothing can offend,
Nothing to lose one ancient midnight Friend:
He hopes then, when his Cause comes on, they will all attend.
Let Critic Foes remember it is past Lent,
And all good Christians Curses then were spent.

THIS only I would offer to you more:
My known Alliances, and kindred Blood,
By intercourse of Marriages with Rome,
Cementing long the Honor of my House,
With all the interests of that glorious State,
May well protest for me, that I advise
Abandoning the Romans to their Fate,
As necessary to avert our own.

To avert our own!

At least you will join with me,
It may be needful to advance our own.

Ay, there I close with you when you speak plain.
The Romans Loss at Cannae shows it self
Plainly in this, that their Confederates,
Who had stood Ages fast and firm for Rome,
From that most dreadful Day began to fail;
Deserting her in absolute Despair
Of her lost Empire, not to be restored.

You have a List of all the several States,
People, and Cities that are fallen away
From Rome to the Carthaginians:
Let it be read --

It has been read already.
Their Number and Example should advise
Their Neighbors, who intend to follow 'em
As we must do, to follow cheerfully;
To jump into our Resolutions;
What must be done, to have it frankly done;
To make a merit of our Forwardness;
And not disgrace the Service we intend,
By cold Debates, Indifference and Delay.

Our Rabble are in barefaced Mutiny.


And have declared themselves for Hannibal.


The noise comes this way now.


It Is every where.


Make way for Decius Magius.

Decius Magius!
I thought he had given over the Commonwealth.

I thought so too: But there is nothing certain:
I was in hopes I might have staid at home:
But when a City is in general Flame,
Cripples will find their Legs to cry out Fire.
Age has not much to lose: But I am come
To awake, to rouse, and warn you of your Ruin.

What is this Ruin, Decius Magius?


In such an honorable Argument,
As yours may be, in the Tarentine War,
A Peace from Pyrrhus was proposed with Rome:
The Question almost was resolved for Pyrrhus:
When Appius, as we have it on Record,
Aged and blind, disabled long before
To the State's Service, and the public Cares,
Was led into the Senate, and inspired
By Indignation, and his Country's Cause,
Swayed the Debate, never to make a Peace
With any foreign Foe in Italy.
I come by his Example: He was happy
In his Success; and so may I be blessed,
So may I thrive to Day, as this great Cause
That lies before you now is of more worth,
Of weightier worth, and threatening Consequence.

A long Preamble: What will be the Tale?


They say, you are upon deserting Rome,
And joining Hannibal: I have a Voice
Before it comes to that, and must be heard.

We have all Voices for our Countries good.


Our Country's Honor is her chiefest good.
Can we forget what Rome has been to us?
A fostering Neighbor of our Infant State:
A kind Rejoycer in our Growth and Strength:
Ever a Friend: And in Adversity,
(As we have tasted of that bitter Cup,
Now swill'd in Pleasures to the giddy Brim
Of drunken Riot, and Forgetfulness:)
In our bad Days, I say, she still has been
A Comforter, a Parent, and Protector.

Well, Decius Magius, had you minded us,
If we had been inclining to forget
What, as Allies and Friends, we owe to Rome.
But Vibius Virius, you our Legate were,
Commissioned to Rome's Consul: You can say --

That we have paid all our Respects of Grief;
Condol'd their Dire Misfortunes, offering
Supplies of all things wanting to their Wars:
This in the general Name of Capua:
But Cordials to the Dead are so applied:
Fortune has left 'em nothing to supply.
The Roman Legions, Ensigns, Horse, and Arms,
Men, Money, and Provisions, routed, spoiled,
All in the Day of Cannae were destroyed,
Or on the Morrow's Plunder of both Camps.

So that it is not enough to aid 'em now:
If you do any thing you must resolve
To undertake their War with Hannibal.

And can you undertake a worthier Cause?
Is there a worthier, than a social War?
Our Ancestors compelled within these Walls,
No longer able to Defend the City,
The Samnites, Cidicines, investing us,
Sinking in Ruin, who upheld us then?
Who, but the Romans, could have saved us then?
They took us trembling to Protection:
Sustained a War for near a Hundred Years,
With Fortune often varying the Event,
Dreadful to Italy, against the Samnites,
Which they begun, and carried on for us:
And is there nothing to be done for them?

Why, that is true; if we could do it,
Without an injury to our selves.

Have we not always been affianc'd Friends?
Our Laws, our Customs, Coustitutions
Almost akin, and, as our Marriages,
Mingled, and wove into our mutual Weal?
The Citizens of Rome, and Capua,
Enjoying common rights of Burghesie,
Speak us indeed one People in two States.
So that whatever mischiefs fall on them,
Betide us too; and we must stand obliged,
By all the Bonds of honest Interest,
To save a Country, equal to us both.

That I don't so well understand neither.


This is no. Samnite, no Hetrurian War;
Where if one lose a Neighbor State must win;
And though the Empire should be torn from Rome,
It still remains with us in Italy.
We shall not find it so with Foreigners:
The Carthaginians are these Foreigners:
The Carthaginians are our Enemies --

Hold, have a care --


I will, to speak the truth;
And say again they are our Enemies:
Rivals of Empire, in this second War:
And therefore to be thought the common Foes
Of Rome, of Capua, and of Italy.

Urged home, and boldly.


O! let us pay the debt of Glory now!
Though Rome be drooping, we may raise her Head.
Our Forces are unbroken, fresh, entire:
Full thirty thousand Foot, four thousand Horse,
Upon our Musters in Campania:
Money, Munitions, and Provisions,
With the proud Train and Equipage of War,
Martiall'd, and ready Harnessed for the Field,
All high of Heart, and full of able Proof.
If then our Friendship, and Fidelity,
Answer the firmness of our Strength and Power,
Hannibal will not perceive his Victory;
No, nor the Romans feel their sore defeat.

Here comes another Messenger.


The news?


If I had breath, it is not to be told.
The madding Rabble have at last possessed
The sober part, the peaceful Citizens,
Infected by their fury, are in Arms;
And Capua now is but one Multitude.

There is no time for Foreign Argument
Of right and just; of future good or ill:
Since what we have to fear, is present now,
Imminent, and breaking on our Heads at home.

Make way -- good Marius Blosius take your seat:
We know you have done the best you can for us:
When you're collected, you will tell us all.
Disorders, Tumults, and Confusions,
Raging with Horror up and down our Streets,
Had spent themselves in Opposition
Of their contending Parties; there we hoped
The Uproar would have end: But now they join,
Rabble and Citizens, in horrid League,
And all combined in Violence, resolve
On Mischiefs more premeditate and bold.

Resolve on what?


What Mischiefs are resolved?


All who are Romans found in Capua,
(As we have Families transplanted here)
Though in the service of our State employed,
Or in their private Callings, they have seized --

How! seized!


Men, Women, Children, hudled in the Rout,
Without distinction hurried and shut up,
Under the name of Safety, in our Baths,
The public Baths, where choked with Heat and Smoke,
Their struggling Souls must wretchedly expire,
If timely not set free.

If this goes on
Ruin must follow: I will spare no Pains
For their Deliverance.

Wretched indeed!


Barbarous and cruel to our worst of Foes,
Without a Name to our Allies and Friends!

No Friendship, no Alliance after this.
What they have done, is a sad Argument
They will do more to carry to their ends.

Nay, there is more in hand, and to be feared,
Directed this way too: For, One and all,
They cry, the Senate's Councils are too slow,
That they intend to come and quicken 'em --

The Gods forbid!


Avert this Danger, Heaven!


But that we shall no longer buy and sell
Their Interests, with our mercenary Tongues:
That we but hold the Government in trust
For them, they all have Law enough for that,
They say, they can recall it when they please.
They Will do their Work themselves; they will have no more
To do with us; we never did 'em good,
Before this time; and now against our will;
Affording 'em such just occasion
To throw us off, Senate and Tyranny.

Heaven grant it go no farther.


But I fear --


They bear us ancient hate on former Scores:
And what the Privilege of such lawless Times,
May set 'em on to act, is to be feared.

Nay, what portends the worst, and threatens most:
This headlong Rout, this lewd ungover'd Crew,
Is Captain'd, headed, and led on by some,
The noblest Blood, and foremost of our Youth:
Who never will think their services well paid,
But at the price of universal Change.

They Are at our Doors.


What will become of us!


Fly, fly you Senators of Capua:
There is no safety for you, but in Flight:
The People are determined in your Doom,
And now come on to Execution:
They Have vowed to Murder you, and so give up
The Commonwealth void of all Government
To Hannibal, and Carthaginian Power,
To model new, and stamp what form he please:
As the best Sacrifice, the justest Means,
To atone his wrath, and punish your delay.

Let us not stand confounded in our fears:
Gaping on one another, as relief,
Without our care, would drop into our Mouths.

What can we do?


We would do any thing.


No God to pity us!


Pacuvius, you have been the Peoples Friend;
Would we had all.

Ay, good Pacuvius,
You might do much, would you appear for us.

I had some credit with 'em: what it is now --


They will hear you.


I cannot promise that.
But what I can, I will: perhaps I may
Do more than you expect -- but then you must
Give up your Faith entire to what I do;
Lay by your Fewds, and Factions in the Senate;
Submitting all to my Direction.

Dispose of all, so you deliver us.


Shut up the Gates; none to pass in or out,
But by my Orders: if a Senator
Escapes your Guard, you answer with your lives
To our great Lords the People.

Why, here is a Lord indeed.


He does not think himself too great
To be the Peoples Friend.

No, no, Lord Pacuvius has been always our Friend:
And we will be his upon Occasion: for he shall find himself,
Within this half hour, the only Senator unhang'd in Capua.

My Countrymen; my fellow Citizens!
It Is in your Power now to revenge your selves
On this detested Senate, justly fallen
Under your Sentence; odious grown to all,
Who love the People, or the Commonwealth.
I offer you a full and safe Revenge,
A free Revenge, nothing to Interrupt,
But you may do your Work with decency:
No Tumult for one Senator to escape in.
Without the danger of invading 'em
In their particular Houses, which would be
Defended by their Friends, Clients, and Slaves,
I have 'em here, defenseless, and alone,
Imprisoned in the Palace. Say the word
What shall be done with 'em?

Come, come, open the Gates,
We'll quickly dispose of 'em.

Ay, ay, we are Men of Expedition,
And so they shall find us, to their Cost:
Every Man take his Senator; We'll hang 'em
Upon the Battlements of the Palace, for a stinking
Example to all Commonwealths.

Hold you, hold you, I don't like hanging:
There Is a great deal to be done in a handsome Execution.

Look you, my Masters, I am but a plain Man to see

to, as a body may say, but I can speak my Mind without being
asked, as soon as those that are wiser: Look you, time is precious,
and we have a great deal to do with it; make as short
work as you can, I advise; even cut their Throats, and
there is an end on it.

Cutting of Throats is but a
Slovenly way of doing Justice:
I am for doing things decently, Neighbors, and I believe
I have hit it: This is not an ordinary Day with us, you know,
Why then let us make a Holy Day of it indeed;
Set the Palace a Fire about the Senators Ears,
And there is a Bonfire to our Holy Day.

Agreed, agreed, a Bonfire, a Bonfire.


It was the very thing I was thinking of --


Why very well.


Nay, it is excellent,
To have the old Drones smothered in their Hives.

No more to be said, Boys;
About it instantly, my Lads.

We are all in a mind once in our Lives.


Fire the Palace, down with it, Fire the Palace.


And yet what has this noble building done?
A public Ornament, a reverend Pile,
That has stood Ages -- but if you please to think
It has stood long enough, why, down with it;
Who shall find fault? It is the Commonwealths,
The People's, and you may dispose your own.

How Is that? The Palace Ours!
Let Us hear him a little upon that Subject.

The Senators! blow them up in a Blaze:
You will miss nothing of 'em, but their Beards:
Or if you should, they cheaply are supplied.
But if the Senate House be laid in Ashes,
Who shall repair the Ruin?

At a time when Capua stands the Rival of great Rome,
You would not strip her of her Palaces,
To leave her naked to her Neighbors scorn?

No, no, We don't desire that neither.


This venerable Structure may stand up
With our most celebrated public Domes,
Sacred and Common, Temples, Theaters,
And all our numerous progeny of Art,
The Monuments of famous Ancestry,
That speak as loud for us, as Rome's for her.
And would you throw it down?

If you repent, when it is down, who builds it up again?
The public Purse alone, the common Stock
(The Citizens freeborn Inheritance)
Whoever does the mischief, pays for all.

If it be so, my Masters!


It Is as he says, Man, and the case is quite altered.


Why, my Lord, we are at a loss here
For want of Employment.

You have saved the Building, it is true,
And we thank you for it: But the Senators --

Ay, ay, the Senators, the Senators --


I am their Jailer still, to answer their forthcoming,
When you please, and to promote the Justice you intend,
Since you are not agreed among your selves,
I do propose to bring each Senator
Upon the trial of his single Merit,
To stand or fall, just as his Cause deserves:
Your selves to be the Judges.

Why there you have hit it, my Lord?


Every honest Man must be
Of your Lordship's Mind.

Your selves to be the Judges!
Mark you that?

Well, my Lord, Pray proceed in your own Method:
We know you're a Friend to us,
We'll be governed by you.

Then in the first place, I would have you
So govern your Anger, that your Anger get
Not the upper hand of your Interest and Safety.
For I suppose your Hatred extends to these Senators only;
You like the Constitution well enough --

My Lord, that is more than we can say
With a safe Conscience.

What! Not like a Senate!


To tell you the truth, we don't approve of the Order,
And would banish it the City, if we could.

You must have a Government among you.


You must have a Senate; a Senate is
But the great Council of a free People,
And that is for your Good you must own.

Well, if we must have a Senate --


Why, that is well said:
Then in order to a Reformation, my Masters,
There are two things that call upon you at the same time;
The dissolving your old Senate,
And choosing a new one in the room.

Why, there I grant you,
A Senate of our own choosing we may like.

We'll choose a Senate, I warrant you.


I will summon the Senators,
One after another, to appear before you:
What you judge of 'em shall be executed:
I will only gather your Voices.

This is method now.


Unbar the Gates, and bid the Senators
Prepare themselves to appear upon their Names.

Ay, this is doing business.


But one thing you must promise me, my Friends,
To punish none, however criminal,
Before you choose an able, honest Man
Into his place, as a new Senator.

That Is fair on every side.


Here is a Roll, agree among your selves
Whom to cite first --
This Day must crown our hopes.

The Deputies are returned from Hannibal.


Let 'em be ready, I shall want 'em straight.


Let Us see, let us see, where shall we begin,
At the top or the bottom.

Hold you, hold you; Titus Didius here; begin at him:
I happened to get a Slave of his with Child,
And he made me marry her, for which
I should be very glad to see him hanged.

Make 'em into Lots, I say,
And let 'em be drawn fairly.

Ay, ay, every Man take his chance.


O that Perolla, my degenerate Son,
Would follow thy Ambition; but he pules,
And Conscience bound in such a Cause as this,
The Cause of Empire, basely stands for Rome
Against his Country, and his Father's House.

That Decius Magius has infected him.


My old Opposer still.


He has been every where among the Crowd,
To spread the Poison of his Politics:
But we had dos'd 'em with our Antidotes;
Timely preventing all the giddy turns,
That might have happened to that sickly State;
Confirmed the crazy Constitution
Of their weak, wavering Minds; and now we have
Scattered, dispersed the Faction, and the Cause,
Quite routed him, and his malignity.

So that the People all stand sound for us.
But do not trust 'em with themselves too long:
They will relapse into their natural fears,
And cool, without your Fire to keep 'em warm.

These you will take care of: I have other parties
To Head, and bring up on occasion.

So, so, without favor, or affection, now open it --


Who have you drawn?


Rutilius Lupus.


Rutilius Lupus there, let him appear.


Ay, ay, let him appear,
And be hanged for his pains, I say.

Ay, so say I.


And all of us.


Here, here, he comes.
He has always been an Enemy to the People.

And now we'll quit scores with him.


Well, he is doomed: You do expel him first
The Senate -- but before his Punishment,
You must elect a New one in his Room.

Ay, ay, that is quickly done.


He may pass on, we'll talk with him anon.


Who shall we choose Neighbors?


Let Us lay our Heads together,
And do it to purpose, once in our Lives.

Why, ay, who shall we choose?


Let me see --


Some body that deserves very well of the Commons.


That Is to be sure.


One that is in the interest of his Country;
And, if possible, will continue so
In spite of Preferment --

That Is the Man, that is the Man.


Who, who?


Nay, good troth, I cannot tell;
We have not found him yet.

He must be one, we have nothing to say against --


Ay, marry, who may that be?


One who wonnot forget his Benefactors,
The People that raised him.

A very good Quality indeed;
Now name the Man that owns it, and I give him my Voice.

Nay, I name no Body.


Name no Body! what! We must name some Body:
Come, I Will name one -- Cecilius Nepos. --

Cecilius Nepos! there is a Man indeed!


What do ye think of him?


We don't think of him.


Stay, stay, the Senators are called Fathers,
You know --

What then?


Why, in that sense he may be qualified:
And thou do honestly to set him up.
For he is naturally thy Senator,
Being the Father of thy Family.

No, no, we'll Father our Children without him,
If we can, with our Wives leave, we'll none of him.
Set up another.

Titus Volcatius.


That Is worse and worse.


What shall we do with him?


He knows nothing of the matter.


When he shows any management
In his private Affairs, we may
Begin to think of him for the Public:
In the mean time, let him play the fool
At his own expense, and in private;
As he uses to do.

Mamellius then.


Mamellius! who is he?


He is one, that was squeezed out of the Necessities of the Government; that
has made a hard shift to get a mighty Estate, by the common Calamities; a
plaguey rich Fellow


Rich! as a dunghill may be,
By a Congregation of Filth and Villainy.

Would he were to be so well bestowed;
Carried out by a common consent, for he is a Nuisance
As he is, and spread abroad for the enriching the Public.

O, ho, I know him, a Viper, that has eaten through the Bowels of his Country, in
hopes of coming to the Head on it: But I hope he will return as he came, and go
out at the Tail


Well, Furius Philus.


He Is too proud for us.


Marcus Mutius.


Let him pay his debts.


He pays no Body, as it is.


And you would give him a privilege
To ruin his Neighbors.

Well, are you agreed?


Agreed, my Lord, there is nothing to agree upon:
When we come to particulars, it is only to find fault:
Men are but men; and, new or old,
The Senate's the same.

Why do you dissolve this then?


We don't dissolve it.


No, no, we don't dissolve it.


And for this Reason, Neighbors, to carry home to your Wives, to stop their
Mouths withal; because the Evils that we are best acquainted with, are always
the easiest to be born


Marry I think so too.


And all of us.


Therefore I am for setting
The Senators at Liberty.

Ay, ay, set 'em at Liberty.


Provided they join with us in this business.


Heartily, and speedily, or we shall visit 'em again.
And so you may tell 'em, my Lord.

I wonnot fail.


Pacuvius! O! what Honors are thy due!
Statues, and Temples, thou Deliverer!

We cannot speak our humble thanks too low,
In the deep sense of our acknowledgments.

Thou have saved our Lives, dispose of them and us --


Our Fortunes, Friends, and dearest Interests.


Command in all, for we owe all to thee.


I have been the happy Instrument indeed
To serve the Senate --

Nay, to save the State.


And I am nobly paid in the good work.


The People though will not be so satisfied.


No, they are obstinate upon their Terms,
You must comply with 'em.

We are agreed in every Article for Hannibal.


And would declare our selves, did not our Friends --


Under the Roman Arms in Cicily --


As Hostages for our Fidelity,
Withhold us, till we can provide for them.

That fear was urged before; but you shall have
It fully answered by our Deputies:
I see they are returned.

O! welcome, welcome!


What have you done for us with Hannibal?


We bring most advantageous Terms of Peace.
These the Conditions; the last of which
Removes the present fear, and does provide
Expressly for our Friends in Cicily.

Let that be read.


Nay, read 'em not in parts.


He offers you three Hundred Roman Knights,
Which you shall choose out of his Prisoners,
To give the Romans, in a fair Exchange,
For our Campanian Youth in Arms with them.

He has hit upon the sole Expedient,
To ensure the Lives and Safety of our Friends.

He offers more than we could ask of him.


You Will find him in all points as generous.


Now are you satisfied?


We ask no more.


In the just confidence of profer'd Love,
He comes himself, the Hostage of his Faith,
To Capua.

So my Advices say, but mention not the time.


He comes this Day: He Is on his March already.


Let us prepare for his Reception.


Summon the People to the Forum then,
And let the Articles be read to 'em:
So hand in hand we shall proceed in Love,
And act unenvied for our Country's good.

Pacuvius! You have done most worthily,
Saving the Senate: Would you would employ
Your Interest with the People always so.
The wretched Romans wanted such a Friend:
I had no Power: But Death has set 'em free.

Dead! Are they dead?


All perished in the Baths.
And they are left behind, to blush in Blood
For this Day's Treason, who encouraged it:
It must be answered for to Gods and Men,
And Capua rue it in her Sons unborn;
An impious City of devoted Crimes!
The Vengeance will fall heavy, and, I fear,
Fall wide enough, even to involve us all.

Alas! We are not guilty of their Death.


But mourn alike with you the People's Rage.


What could we do?


What are you doing now?
Where are you going? Do you leave me too?
But you indeed have left me long ago.
Your Steps have erred long from the track of Truth,
And are not worth an honest Man's pursuit:
But I will follow. If I cannot prevent,
I may protest against their Practices:
That Is in my Power: That will exempt me from
The general Guilt, and justify my Fame:
Let me secure my Innocence, and then
Death to an Old Man cannot come too soon.

What Is Beauty? Bright Favonia, tell.
The Mistress of it knows it well.
It Is not Color, it is not Feature,
Easy Fashion, nor good Nature:
Good Teeth, and Hair, a smiling Grace,
Cannot give Perfection to a Face:
Not yielding Lips, or wishing Eyes:
But she is handsome who denies.
WHAT Beauty is, let Strephon tell,
Who often has tried it, knows it well:
Not all the Wonders of a Face,
Where Nature triumphs in each Grace,
Not Snowy Breasts, through which is seen
The purple Flood that boils within,
Not Lips, when Wit with ease beguiles,
Whilst playsom Cupids dance in Smiles,
Not Youth, not Shape, not Air, not Eyes,
She only charms me who complies.
Among your Women in your Huswifry!
Fie, it is a Profanation of the Day,
Sacred, and set apart from common use,
And dedicated to the public Joy.

The public Joy, my Lord!


The general Joy:
In which I have secured a part for thee,
A liberal share for my Favonia.

May I secure my private Peace at home:
And for the public, let the Joy, and Grief,
Fall to their different Fates, who rise and fall.
The State does not concern a Woman's Care:
Yet, Sir, I thank you for remembering me.

Do thou! Well, there is something even in that;
There is a kind of Gratitude in Thanks,
Though it be barren, and bring forth but Words.

I do not understand --


Thou do not; true:
And that is the very root of my Complaint,
That any thing relating to my Love
Should still be strange, not understood by thee.

My Lord --


O! thou art cold in my reception,
Thou can not think thy self, but thou art cold.
I would have met my Welcome in thy Arms,
My eager Welcome in thy longing Arms,
That should have crushed me inward to thy Heart,
Into thy Heart, if it were possible,
Throbbing and beating with the Pulse of Love:
That, that had been a Welcome fit for me;
And a just Recompense of all my Pains.

Indeed, my Lord, I owe you every thing,
In recompense of what you have done for me:
But for your welcome, that you bring along
With you; it is yours, as you are Master here:
And if I have not served it up to you,
As does become the Duty of my place,
With that frank Cheerfulness to give content,
Let me not answer for my Nature's Faults.

Nay, now thou art too serious.


I am unhappy in the want of all
Those necessary, natural Arts to please.

Thou art above the little reach of Arts,
And can want nothing, but the Will, to please.

What is there that I can invite you to,
That you do not dispose of?

Nothing, nothing:
Thou art all mine; and let me tell my Heart,
That hourly grows more covetous of thy Love,
And therefore busy to torment it self,
Its Fears are vain, and thou art wholly mine.

I own your Title, and you are the Lord
Of every thing that does belong to me.

Why, what would I have more? There Is nothing more.
I do confess that I am happier
Than I deserve to be; much happier:
I commit many Faults, but none to thee.
O! could thy gentleness of Soul infuse
Its Spirit into my Breast, to temper mine;
How should I then be blessed! But who can tell?
Perhaps it is better ordered as it is.
Indifference would never suit my Fate.
My Passions are unruly, and sometimes
Break loose on my best Friends: But then you should
Consider 'em as the effects of Love:
As the effects! Nay, they are Love it self
For Love it self is all the Passions,
At least to me: Whether it be Desire,
Or Hope, or Fear, or Anger, or Revenge,
In all its different Motions, still it is Love.
Love, Love! The great Incendiary here!
His Torch sets all this little World on Fire:
And let it burn, to purify my flame:
For Life and Love shall both burn out together.

Sir, you are stayed for.


So, so, well, I come.
I have forgot my self, my business too,
With looking on thee. Can thou tell me, Love,
What 'twas I came about?

Business, you say.


I fancied I had mighty business here:
But now I find 'twas but a fond pretense
To come and visit thee.

You're always kind.


The hurry and the struggle of the Day,
You were Informed in by my Messengers.

They hourly brought me the particulars.
And there are somethings done, which I could wish --

Things which I thought I could not have allowed.
And, but to raise thy Fortune, never would --

Pray heaven they do not overturn it quite.


But they must pass with others in the Crowd,
There will be mischief in confusion:
I had forgot: Thou art a Stranger still
To the sad News: Thy Rival is no more.

My Rival!


Yes, thy Rival in my heart:
You had it all between you, Wife and Friend:
Junius, that Friend is dead.

Dead! Is he dead?


He fell at Canna: Had he been alive,
And still a Roman in his interest;
I never could have been a Foe to Rome.
I have an hour of grief to Dedicate --
But this is not the time. I Am called upon.
Hanibal comes, the glorious Hannibal.
His entry will be most Magnificent,
And will reward your Curiosity.
I will provide you Place, and send for you.

What? what is there that I can want on Earth,
To fill the measure of my happiness?
Why am I not contented with my Lot?
So kind a Husband falls not to the fate
Of every Wife: All that he says, and does,
All his designs are working still for me:
And yet I cannot thank him, as I ought.
Not but I ever had a dutious Sense --
But that is not the payment of the Heart.
He asks my Love, and not my Gratitude.
And why is that denied? O! Junius!
But thou art dead, and I may name thee now.
I made it Criminal to pronounce his Name,
Avoiding every way all news of him,
Endeavoring to forget him, if I could.
But Oh! the torment, and the rack of Soul!
To keep our thoughts for ever on the bent
Upon themselves, still laboring to forget,
What, by the labor, we remember more.
Why did thou come between him, and my Heart?
Why rather did my Husband place thee there,
By bringing thee into the Family?
I saw no danger, till it was too late.
But what have I not done, and suffered too,
To drive thee thence, to make Virginius room?
I have maintained an everlasting War
Within this Breast, still fighting on his side:
Have summoned all my succors to my Aid;
My Native Powers, and the Confederate Force
Of Reason, Duty, Virtue; nay brought down
The Woman's last Reserve of all, my Fame:
Weak Aids, alas! against the Tyrant Love.
But he is deposed, and Death has set me free:
A greater Tyrant gives me Liberty.

A Garrison in Capua! O! prevent,
Resist their Entrance, block their Passage up.
Remember Pyrrhus, and the Tarentines;
His insolent Rule, and their subjected State.

They are already entered.


Let 'em not possess themselves,
Expel 'em, drive 'em out:
Or if, by a brave memorable Blow,
You would redeem your baseness to your Friends,
Cut 'em in pieces, and compound with Rome.

They are not of your Party. They fall off.


Old honesty is used to stand alone.


Here comes my Father.


Good young Man retire:
I may say something that you would not hear.

Widen our Gates; let our encircling Walls
Sink in the Earth, that nothing may appear,
Even in a seeming Opposition,
To stand against the conquering Hannibal:
The Conqueror of Rome, but Capua's Friend.

We need no Ramparts now, no Bulwarks, Walls,
We Are strongly Fortified in Hannibal.

What are the Forces that he brings along?
Not only Affricans, but Nations drawn
From the extremest limits of the Earth;
Hercules's Pillars, and the Ocean's Bounds:
Who have no knowledge of Humanity:
And but in Humane Speech differ from Beasts:
Brutal, and Bloody: but their Leader has
Advanced their natural Barbarity:
Erecting Monstrous Bridges of the Dead,
On Human Bodies urging his proud way --

Nay, Decius Magius.


And, as an absolute Master of the War,
Defying Famaine in his horrid Camp,
Has taught 'em to devour the Flesh of Men.

Now, Magius, you grow Dangerous indeed.


Are these to be our Friends? these our Allies?
Who that is but a Son of Italy,
Can see, and suffer such detested Slaves,
Whom but to touch is a Pollution;
Such obscene Villains to become our Lords?
What! shall we turn a Province to their Power?
Who would depend on Afric for her smiles,
That looks upon the fair-fac'd Italy?
Can you consent, that she should fall at last;
A sober Matron, and unsullied yet,
With all her Graces, to the swarthy spoil
Of hot Numidians, and lust-burnt Moors?

We'll hear no more. Perolla, if thou art a Son of mine,
Leave him, and follow me. Forward, my Lords.

I have done with Hannibal.
And now, Pacuvius, a word to thee.

I know my Duty here, and will withdraw
From what I fear, a Father's Infamy.

This you must answer.


To the Gods, and Men,
I Will answer it; would thou could do as much,
For what thou have done.

I have served the Commonwealth --


Thou have served thy self.


And it is thy Envy rails.


O! that there was no juster cause to speak!
But sure there is not so reprobate a Wretch,
To envy thee the ruin of thy Country.

The ruin of thy peevishness and pride.


That Fame unenvi'd shall be wholly thine.
Thou can not as a freeborn Citizen,
But understand, that true prosperity
Lives in a common share of liberty:
Not in the plunder of our Neighbors rights.

Who has invaded 'em?


Thou would be first:
And would thou had been so, in dignity
Of honest deeds: but that was not enough.

I find I am arraigned: What was there more?


Thou have long practiced on the Government:
Poys'ning its wholesome Constitution,
By lawless, bold experiments of power.
And now they are broke out in Tyranny,
To infect the health and life of Liberty.

Because I have appeared the peoples friend.


Thou did betray the people to themselves,
By taking off their safe restraining Laws:
And then the Senate to the Peoples rage:
That by the credit of redeeming both,
Thou might betray Us all to Hanibal.

It Is very well; go on; let him go on.


What is the puny part that thou must act
In this poor Farce of thy Ambition?
What will it end in? O! thou would be feared,
Rather than loved; thou shall be hated too;
And then what comes of thee? Who can be happy
On such conditions of an anxious Life;
That even his Murderer shall not only 'scape
Unpunisht, but shall be rewarded too?
All good Men will combine against thy life:
Tho this may want design to lay the Plot;
A second, Courage to attempt the Deed;
Another want an Opportunity;
All will consent, and wish to have it done.
It is enough for gallant Minds to know
How honorable in the enterprise,
How grateful in the general benefit,
How glorious in the Renown and Fame,
It is to kill a Tyrant. Hannibal,
Immured in walls of Steel, cannot be safe.

O! he will take care to save himself from you.


Where then can thou from Justice hide thy head?


The Laws are living still, to punish such
Licentious tongues.

By Death, or Banishment?
Say which, thou Tyrant; which do thou pronounce?
Death drives us from the fellowship of mankind:
But Banishment from only such as thee.
Before I take my Journey, I prefer
These two Petitions to the immortal Gods:
The First, That I may leave my Country free:
The next, Pacuvius, thou will join me in:
And we will bind all our posterity
In the strong Charm, as guilty of this Vow:
That all that does belong to thee, and me,
Our Children, Kindred, Family, and Name,
May flourish, or decay, may rise, or rot;
Be blessed, or cursed, as thou and I deserve
From Capua, and from the Commonwealth.

Thou have Cursed thy self, and so expect thy Fate.


When I was Young, I fought for Capua,
And wonnot now desert her, being Old:
But all my bravery is in my Tongue,
I can but talk, and that unminded too.

I fear you will find you have done and said too much.


Stand, Decius Magius --


Well, I am the Man.


I come from Hannibal, to summon you to appear before him.


Tell your Hannibal
His Punick Language is not current here:
We do not understand his summoning:
He has no right upon a Capuan:
I am freeborn, and therefore wonnot come.

O Sir, you are undone.


I think not so.


The Snares are set, you cannot 'scape 'em now.


You are encompassed round with Enemies.


Better encompassed round with Enemies,
Than live to be forsaken of our Friends.
Distress is Virtue's Opportunity;
We only live, to teach us how to dye.

What is this Pomp of Hannibal to me?
I cannot lose my self even in the Crowd;
His coming would be welcome, could it guard
All other Images from entering here.
While I am gazing on the Triumph, one,
Meaning no harm, cries, This is the reward
Of Cannae's Field: I start, and take the hint,
Pursuing it quite through that Scene of Blood,
Till it presents at last my Junius slain:
My Junius, O! the guilt of that Surprise!
Why must I harbor in my Bosom Thoughts
Thus to surprise me to my sin and shame?
I shall betray my self in Company,
Therefore most fit for me to stay at home.
Oh! let the steps of Youth be cautious,
How they advance into a dangerous World;
Our Duty only can conduct us safe:
Our Passions are Seducers: but of all,
The strongest, Love: he first approaches us,
In childish play, wantoning in our Walks,
If heedlesly we wander after him,
As he will pick out all the dancing way,
We Are lost, and hardly to return again;
We should take warning, he is painted blind,
To show us, if we fondly follow him,
The Precipices we may fall into.
Therefore let Virtue take him by the hand,
Directed so, he leads to certain joy.

Is there no more to be seen? is the Show over already? Is this all?


All, Why, what did you expect?


Expect, marry, I expected.


You saw Hannibal, did you not?


Yes, yes, I saw Hannibal: But, what? I thought he had been half as big as one
of his Elephants: Your Heroes, I find, are little more than other Men, when you
come near to examine 'em


But did you mind his looks?


How terrible he looked with that one Eye!


Very terrible indeed.


I stood by him a good while, and heard all that he said to the Senate when
they met him


And what, what did he say?


Why, he began very civilly, that is the truth on it, and thankt us for
preferring his Friendship before our Alliance with the Romans


And what more?


Why, he assured us, that Capua should, in a little time, be the Capital City
of Italy


Ay, marry Sirs.


And that the Romans themselves, as well as other People, should do Homage to
us, and fall under our Government


Nay, Pacuvius told us as much; that when the War was at an end, and Hannibal
the Conqueror, he would carry back his Forces into Afric, and leave us the
Empire of Italy. We shall all be Great Men


But I did not so well like the end of his Speech.


How so?


'Twas all against Decius Magius: and truly he came to plain speaking at last,
and told 'em roundly, He expected they should deliver him into his Power


And what said the Senators?


Why truly, not much to the purpose at that time: Some said Magius did not
deserve to be so used neither; others, That such a beginning would have an ill
end; but they agreed at last to deny nothing to Hannibal, and so gave the old
Man up to his mercy


See where he comes.


O what a Sight is here?


A Rope about his Neck, and bound in Chains.


A Carthaginian Guard upon him too.


Have your Eyes every way upon the Crowd;
If any man but seems to pity him,
Secure him as an Enemy to the State.

You see, my Countrymen, the libert,
You have brought home at last for you, and yours.
Here, in the Forum, in the barefaced Sun,
You see a Citizen of Capua,
Second to none in Name and Dignity,
Torn from his Friends, and forced in Chains to death;
Go meet your Hannibal, crowd all your Streets;
Dress up your Houses, and your Images,
And put on all the City's Finery,
To consecrate this Day a Festival
Of Barbarous Triumph over you and me.

I Will spoil your speech-making; drag him along.


O! piteous Spectacle.


Piteous indeed,


This is the setting out of Slavery.


It Is well if it goes no farther:
Not allow us to pity our Fellow Citizens!

Ay, did you mark that?


They begin to show themselves already.


In Colors I don't like:
We may repent too late what we have done.

O you have lost the best of the Show, the sight of the Prisoners, and the
Bushel of Gold-Rings


What! there were so many Roman Knights killed, and taken at Cannae, that their
several Rings, in a heap together, filled a Bushel


So they say, indeed.


Why, then their Bushel lies out of all measure, in my opinion.


The three hundred Knights that were delivered to us, would have been worth
your seeing; gallant Fellows indeed, and wounded most of 'em


Some body said, That Junius was found among the Prisoners.


Yes, yes, Junius, our Countryman was among 'em; he was said to be killed at
Cannae, but he is alive again, and in a way to do very well


He Is a Prisoner, you say.


No, his old Friend Virginius, upon the merit of his violence, and the credit
of his Father Pacuvius, Has made an interest with Hannibal, And, they say, has
got him his liberty


All in good time: but Decius Magius,
Let Us follow all, to know what comes of him.

O Junius! how art thou restored to life!
And I by miracle to happiness!
For tho the bounteous Gods have blessed my Fate
With all the good things, else of this great World;
Yet wanting thee, wanting my other self,
I could not be entire to my content,
Not absolute, nor perfect in my joy.
But they have brought thee back to me again,
And through such 'mazing paths of Providence,
We cannot trace, and only can admire.
Thus thy good fortune rises from the bad.
Had thou not been at Cannae, taken there;
Had we not leagued our State with Hannibal;
Thou had not been among the Prisoners,
The Roman Knights, to be delivered here:
Thou had not seen thy Country, City, Friends;
Nor should I had the interest and power
With Hannibal, to gain thy liberty.

I wonnot be obliged, for any thing,
I do not understand a benefit.
I Am Pris ner of an honorable War;
And do despise my Freedom, but on terms
As brave and honest, as I parted with it:
Such terms I must despair of finding here.

We do invite you to an equal share
Of all the advantages of Government,
Of Place, and Power, with us in Capua.

Therefore I do refuse my liberty.


You wonnot sure refuse it from a Friend.


I have no Friend, nor I pretend to none.


You have been mine, and you have thought me yours.


That was in our young days; when every thing
Was swallowed, and went credulously down.
Our pleasures hurrying on in the same course,
When we pursued 'em with the same desires,
With the same stretch, and eagerness of Youth:
Our manners too in every thing allied;
Then we were Friends for our convenience.
But when the business of the World comes on,
Justling between ambitious interests,
It Is then, in the great voyage of our Life,
As if our Vessels struck upon a Rock,
Each shifts a several way to 'scape the wreck,
And sink, or swim, my Friend; nay, plunge him down,
So by his ruin, I get safe to shore.

It never can be so between us two.
I have no ambition, have no interest,
That Friendship can suspect, or split upon.
Friendship is riches, power, all, to me.
Friendship's another Element of life:
Water and Fire not of more general use,
To the support and comfort of the World;
Than Friendship to the being of my Joy.
I would do every thing to serve a Friend.

And I would serve a Friend in honest things:
I do pretend no farther. You, and I,
You see, have very different sentiments;
Therefore unlikely to continue Friends.
If from our former Brotherhood of Love,
You do suspect I may have any claim,
Against her interest, that should have it all,
Here I renounce it, I resign it here.
And now let us heartily shake hands, and part;
To your high Fortune, You; I to my Fate.

My Fortune and your Fate shall be but one.


They are impossible to reconcile:
You happy, I am born to be a Wretch:
You free, and I condemned to be a Slave.
O! had I fallen with Honor in the Field,
How many miseries had ended there!
Death had secured me then from being led
In Triumph here, over my Country's Shame.
I hate your Hannibal, I hate your Cause:
And now can only be a Friend to Rome.
And if I ever come at Liberty,
It shall be but to strike against you all.

You hear him, he is not to be reclaimed.


This is the present sense of suffering;
The grief of unheal'd Wounds: all will be well.

You cannot trust him with his liberty.


With my own life I will.


Have you resolved
About the trifle of disposing me?

My House your Prison, I must be your Guard.


With your own hands you set it then on fire.


He has warned you, and the consequence be yours.


I WILL hear no more: when next thou speak to me,
Let blood, and death, and ruin be the Theme.
Talk of the Massacres of Families,
Plunder of Cities, and whole Countries waste.
A private mischief is not worth the news.
Tell me that all the dire Calamities
Of raging War, chained up in discipline,
Are now broke loose, trooping in horrid march,
To fright the World, the brood of Cerberus,
And worry all, like the black-guard of Hell.
That Lust and Rapine do divide the Spoil:
That Giant Murder does bestride our Streets,
Stalking in state, and wading deep in Blood.
My Father Butchered, weltring in his Gore:
A Dagger in the Throat of my dear Child:
And thou shall be as welcome then as now.
That Capua is in Universal Blaze;
All, all the winds of Heaven driving this way,
And nothing but my Tears to quench the Flame.
-- Junius alive! even that would give me Death.
In Capua too! that brings it nearer still.
In the same house! that stabs the Dagger home:
It hurries me to Execution,
And Execution too upon the Rack:
Let me be out of pain, before he comes.
What corner shall I find to hide this head in?
Where is that Dungeon-darkness that can blind
The eye of Jealousy? my Husband comes
To draw me to the hateful Light again,
To drag me to the trial of my truth.
What can I plead? O guilty, guilty Wretch!
There is no courage, but in Innocence:
No constancy, but in an honest cause.
Thy Conscience is a thousand witnesses:
And Junius, the chief Accessory, he
Stands out against thee, and confesses all.
I Will hear no more: pronounce my sentence quick,
Let it be Death, to end me any way.

I need not tell you, you command all here,
And that you have your Liberty entire.
Ha! Junius! why that paleness on thy face?
Thy altered looks speak thy condition,
Thou art not well.

Indeed I am not well.


Expense of Spirits, and the loss of Blood.
With needful care they will recruit again.
Rest on my arm, and let me lead you in.

Favonia --


Ha! who calls?


I can no more: I must end here,


Ha!


Fall into these Arms,
They never will refuse to bear thee up.
Favonia, call for help; he comes again;
Stay; lend your hand; soft, gently, set him down.
How is it now?

Conofunded in my shame,
That my infirmity should here intrude.
Your pardon, Madam, will recover me.

Rally your routed spirits to your aid,
Rest will compose and bring 'em back again.
I cannot stay with you, but will return
To cheer, to comfort you, and to renew
The past endearments of our former Friendship.
I will provide you Balm for all your Wounds:
My Wife her self, your kind Physician,
Will wait upon you, till I come again.

I Am hunted to the brink of the Abyss:
Plunge in I must, and to the bottom now.
But first upon my Knees let me fall down,
Trembling, and awed, and fearful of your Frown,
Bespeaking pardon, if I wildly shou d,
In questioning the Gods upon my Fate,
Say any thing toward disturbing you.

O rise, I must not hear you on your Knees.


I m blessed, that you will hear me any way.
But O! the Accent of my Voice is changed:
You cannot know it now in misery.
There was a time, in the gay Spring of Life,
When every Note was as the mounting Lark's
Merry, and cheerful, to salute the Morn;
When all the day was made of Melody.
But it is past, that day is spent, and done,
And it has long been night, long night with me.
I have been happier, you have known me so.

Alas! there is no Fortune perfect here.


Indeed I find it: When I entered first
Into the List of this contending World,
I promised fair for a more prosperous course:
The Favorite of Fortune, and the Friend,
To perfect all, of my Virginius:
We lived the envy of our Capuan Youth,
The most aspiring to the Glorious Fame
Of Friendship, only imitated us.
So blessed you found us.

Would to all the Gods,
I never had come between you, to divide,
To part such Friends.

O! had we parted there:
He to the rich possession of your Charms;
I to a poorer Fortune in my Love;
Yet rich enough, and happy in content,
All had been well: But he would have me home.

O! I remember his impatience.


To be a Witness of his happiness.
And so I was. I heard him every day
Transported in the Riot of the Theme;
Full of the ravishing Discoveries
He hourly made in that blessed Land of Love:
The ever rising Springs of flowing Joy;
The hoarded Mines of treasures, yet unborn:
With such a rapture of variety
Of Pleasures that were ever growing there.
It was not safe to hear, I found it so.

O Cursed effect of foolish Vanity!


What was it to approach then, to behold,
And face to face examine and compare
The Copied Beauties with the Original?
O! they were faint, and the description cold,
Heavy and dead, to the inspiring Life:
And what I thought Extravagance before,
Proved easy to the Wonders I saw there.

What will this end in?


Can we resolve to gaze upon the Sun
With steady Eyes? soon blinded by that Pride
I lost my way; and found my self too late,
Born down the torrent of a Passion,
That always ended in a Sea of Woe:
I plainly saw Ruin attend my Steps;
Therefore resolved to lead 'em far away,
Where they might never come to trouble you.
But O! it was with all the violence
Of Pangs, in Death, that I at last resolved,
And yielded to that only Remedy:
A Remedy worse than the worst of Deaths
To fly the Place, where I must die for Love,
Or live a Traitor to my Friend and Fame.

What have you said?


If I have said too much,
Believe, I rather had in silence died,
Than to have spoke at all: This was the fate
I labored to avoid. But who can shun
His Destiny? it follows every where:
Capua, or Rome, or Cannae, still the same.
I would have welcomed it, that fatal day;
But there it lost me in the Crowd of Death.
This was the place of Execution;
And it has caught, and seized, and bound me here:
I Am on the Rack: What I discover now,
Is only the expression of my Pain,
Wrung from my heart, long overcharged, and full,
Which else should burst with its Convulsive throws,
Rather than ease its Labor by a Groan,
A trembling Sigh, that might offend your Ear.

O Junius! whither are you going? hold.


A little farther, and I shall arrive
At my long home, the Goal of my Despair.
To ask your Pardon, would repeat my Fault:
To ask your Pity, were to draw you in,
By steps of mercy, to a tenderness,
Criminal, and guilty, to reprieve a Wretch,
Who, for the Common Peace, and yours, must die.
There is no Ward against such Blows as these;
They stagger me, and I at last must fall.
Since I am doomed to be a Sacrifice
Of fatal friendship, and of hopeless love.
Here let me fall, I would be offered here;
Allow me dying to confess my Love
In my last Sigh, and at your feet expire.

It Is I am bound, and torn upon the Rack!
I cannot bear it, Junius, Junius:
Look up, and live, and I Will confess enough
For you, and for my self, all that I know, all that I ever heard of
wretchedness
What you have undergone, what I have felt;
What I now feel from this tormenting Love.
Where am I going? help there -- O he comes
Again to life -- fly, fly to my relief.
Use all your Arts, his weakness to restore;
My cure must be, never to see him more.

I HAVE watch't thee with a careful Parents eye,
Followed through all the motions of thy Soul
And cannot find it, therefore have withdrawn,
To give thee place, and opportunity.

And therefore have I followed you, my Lord,
To tell you what it is I labor with.

It Is mighty sure, when the great Hannibal
Not only has forgiven, but honored thee,
At his high Table, bidding thee his Guest,
That can disgrace his Invitation,
Poison his Feast, and in a general Mirth,
Make sad the brow of Youth with discontent.

It Is a design to raise my Countries Fame.


Thy Countries Fame!


You see this Dagger here,
A little instrument for so great a work,
But well employed, and gallantly struck home.

Struck home!


Into the heart of Hannibal,
Would yet atone our infamous revolt.

O Jupiter! thou great deliverer!


I have resolved to make our peace with Rome,
And seal it with this Carthaginian's Blood.
It Is fit that you should know what I intend:
If you approve the deed, then see it done;
If not, take this occasion, and retire.

By all the bonds of Duty, and of Love,
That tie a Son and Father's hearts in one,
I beg, implore, conjure thee to desist:
Let me arrest thee in this horrid course,
That leads through all the steps of infamy,
Into the gulf of sure Perdition.

I think not so.


But now, before the Altars of the Gods,
We interchang'd our Souls, and plighted Faith,
With right-hands joined, in solemn, holy league
Of Sacred Trust: and was there nothing meant
By these good rites of hospitality,
More than, when we had feasted, drank, and laughed;
To get a nearer opportunity
To perpetrate the foulest act of shame,
And Stab our Entertainer?

How my Lord!
Our Entertainer? you compelled me here.

Your Benefactor; he has saved your life.


So is the Robber, that but takes my goods:
And shall I thank him for not doing more?

If there is nothing Sacred; if you think
Religion, Faith, and Piety, restraints
But for the weak, then let loose all the Reins.
Yet when you undertake a Villainy,
Act like a Man, not rashly throw away
Honor and life in the mad enterprise.

My life I have devoted to my Cause,
And Honor must attend it, when it goes.

What! would you singly strike at Hannibal?
Where is the circle of his Officers?
His waiting Slaves, and his attending Guards?
The many eyes that only wake for him?
The many hands always in arms for him?
All blind, and dead? are they confounded all?
Can you alone undaunted stand against
Those looks of Terror, which armed Legions
Have trembled at, and Rome could not sustain?

I can surprise him in his riots here.


O, no, my Son, he is not to be surprised.
There is an awful guard of Majesty
About his Person, that denies approach:
A Majesty of glorious Actions,
Of famous Wars, and bloody Battles gained,
That are his Sword and Buckler every where.
They charge around him, like Numidian Spears,
To terrify and keep off all surprise.
Trebie, and Thrasimene, and Cannae, all
Shelter him with the Laurels of their Fields.
The mighty Ghost of great Aemilius,
That waits him, as his guardian Genius now,
Would wish to die again, a death of shame,
To see a Boy attempt his Conqueror.
But grant you could surprise him, and his guards:
Yet I am there, what will you do with me?
I am his Fortress, I am his Defense.
Will you pursue him through a Father's Life?
If you will Stab him, Stab him then through me.
My breast opposed, first you must reach my Heart,
Before your Dagger can arrive at him.

O, Sir, your words have struck a Dagger here.


Is then the thirst of thy revenge so hot,
Not to be slackt, but with a Father's Blood?

I Will pour out mine to quench your kindled Rage.


Let me deter thee here, rather than go
To throw away thy self, and ruin me.
O let my Prayers prosper, and prevail
With thee, as for thee they prevailed to day.

I must deny you nothing: but you have
Undone your Self, your Country, and your Son.
You have commanded me, and I will pay
That piety to you my Country claims.
O my dear Country! this was my last hope,
To have restored thee to thy Self and Rome.
I had prepared this Dagger in thy Cause:
But since my Father wrests it from my Hand;
I can no more, but with my Grief retire,
And in the Crowd expect the common Fate.

You have withdrawn your self in a bad time.
We wanted you within: the Public has
Put on a different face from what it had:
But Smile, or Frown, we cannot mend it now.

Pray, what is the matter?


Why, the question rose
Upon the taking in the Tarentines.

O, I was by, when their Ambassadors
Were introduced, and had their Audience.
Their business was welcomed, and well received,
But not requiring haste, soon laid aside,
And civily dismissed, while I was there.

It was so, and the Revellings went on.
But then, from all the quarters of the Town,
We were allarmed by clamorous complaints,
Of every kind, against the Soldiers.
Women, and Wine, we knew, of right were theirs,
But in a natural, and manly use,
Not to break through, or over-leap the bounds
Of Government, by brutal violence.
But when they came, without distinction,
To seize on all, proceeding so to Blood,
To Plunder, Murder, and to Ravishment,
'Twas high time to complain.

High time indeed.


Some called on you, others petitioned me:
And every Client to his Patron ran,
To save him, or redress his injuries.

What followed then?


Maherbal standing by,
The Carthaginian General of the Horse,
With his blunt honesty, told Hannibal,
That from the Soldiers Luxury, he foresaw
Capua would prove to him and his affairs,
Fatal, as ever Cannae did to Rome.

Ha! that was home.


Hannibal roused at that,
And gave his orders for a speedy March:
But not so much, on what Maherbal said,
It is believed, as on some News from Rome.

We never wished him to continue here.


But what should be the News that has so soon
Altered his Measures?

O, no matter what
Can come from Rome; he has served the present turn,
And we can serve our selves against the next:
We must be near him, while he stays with us.

IT was her hand that raised me from the Grave;
It was her Mercy that reprieved my Fate:
She meant it in a kind Compassion,
Tho it had been the tendrest Charity,
To let the rigor of the Sentence pass
Upon my Life, and put me out of pain.
I am redeemed from the arrest of Death,
To pine, and languish in a wretched Life.
Is there no Remedy; Want will be heard,
And answered too; I could turn Beggar here:
When once it comes to the extremity
To take, or starve, there is no more a right
Of Property; all things lie common then
In Nature's Field; from Heaven to Hell is ours,
For our support, to compass any way.
What hinders then but I may be relieved?
I have discharged my self from all the Bonds
Of friendship, duty, that encumbered me;
And I am left at large, and free to take
All opportunities that can assist
To make me -- What? a Villain. Am I free?
Discharged of all my obligations?
Why am I here, placed as another Lord
Over this Family, and not a friend?
Is then the Trust and Confidence reposed
In me, and my fidelity, no Bond?
These are State Morals; but adversity
Has ever been an evil Counselor;
And always will be so: I Will hear no more.
I have nothing left me but my honesty,
To write my Epitaph, and grace my Tomb:
Thither I Am going, O Favonia! stay,
I see you shun me, let me only take
A parting look, I wonnot dare to speak,
If I should sigh, it is my last adieu.

ARE these our Friends? what could they have done worse by us, if they had been
our Enemies


If our City had been taken by Storm, they could but have ravished our Wives
and Daughters


And put us to the Sword; you forget that Man.


No, we were reserved for a worse Punishment, to stand by, and look on, as
scandalous Witnesses of our infamy and disgrace


There Is nothing free from their insolence and outrage.


Every place profaned by their Rioting and Drunkenness.


They have invaded every thing that is dear to us.


No Property in any thing.


Especially the Petticoat; nay, it has been very bad indeed; but 'twill mend
now, they are marched away to the Tarentines; and Tarentum take 'em, I say


Hannibal is marched indeed with his Army, but has left a Garrison behind him;
What does he mean by that


To protect us against the Romans.


The Romans! why, we have been told all along there was no danger of them.


I wish we may find it so.


There Is no believing any thing now adays; not a Syllable of truth in the
Mouth of Report, for an honest Man to walk by


It Is all Party, and serving a turn.


There was no News current a great while, but the Distress of the Romans, the
Misery they were brought to, and the utter impossibility of ever appearing in
arms again; that was all the reason we had for deserting our old friends


Now that turn's served, and not so much care taken to stifle Intelligence; we
hear of nothing but their Industry and Virtue; the Preparations and Power of
the Romans: I am credibly informed they have a Consular Army in the Field, and
in a condition to try their fortune again with Hannibal, if he pleases


He may thank himself, if they should beat him now.


If he had marched directly to Rome from Cannae, as he was advised.


But he stayed there playing the Merchant, and selling his Prisoners.


Which provoked Maherbal to tell him, That he knew how to conquer, better than
to use his Victory


If the Romans are so strong, what may become of us then?


Nay, we have pulled our old Houses upon our Heads, and may be buried in the
Ruins, for ought we know


We have deserved as ill as we can of 'em.


And have nothing to pray the Gods, but that they may never have it in their
Power to reward us to our Deserts


That Is all we have to trust to.


Is It possible! he cannot be so base, forgetful, so ungrateful to his Friends.


Contain your self, at least here in the Street; let us not be the first in our
complaints, who were the forwardest --


And we are paid most richly for our pains.


I will come home
To you, and there we will enlarge our hearts --

In spite of all his Guards, and speak bold Truths:
I shall expect you with impatience.

Bold Truths! they may return upon our selves:
For if I speak Truth boldly, as it is,
I cannot be surpised, that Hannibal
Should leave a Garrison, should not trust me
With full command, which I had just before
Abused, betrayed, and given up to him:
To him, I mean to my Ambition:
This little stand of Fortune gives me time
To look about, and see what I have done.
The many violent steps that I have made
To bring me here, to my untimely fall,
It may be too, when Thrasimene was fought,
Being chief Magistrate of Capua,
Had Hannibal marched this way, I had designed
The Senate's slaughter, to deliver up
The City so. I was prevented then:
But now have done it -- not so bloodily.
What was the Romans murder in our Baths,
Was not that Bloody, and set on by me?
I had forgot: it is dangerous to awake
A guilty Memory. Decius Magius too
Stands out to accuse me -- but he is still alive.
O I remember all his Curses now:
May they be blown about, and lost in Air;
Not shed their Venom upon me and mine.

ALL close, and silent! as in depth of Night
Wrapped up in darkness! in the inner room
I spy a winking Lamp, that weakly strikes
The ambient Air, scarce kindling into Light:
That, seeble as it is, shall be my guide.
There I shall find her in her pomp of Grief.
Dare I invade her sacred solitude?
My Heart sinks in me, and my trembling knees
Knock, and forsake me, when I would go on;
Warning me not to touch forbidden ground.
Forbidden! so are all good things to me.
Nothing to hope, I nothing have to fear.

She consecrates the Place, where e're She is,
With reverence: We enter Temples so.
Where are the Terrors, that should keep me back?
Her frowns, the greatest, are disarmed in sleep.
O may the softest down of sweet repose
Receive thee gently on the Bed of Peace,
And fold thee close in the kind arms of rest:
That undisturbed, this Opportunity
May now be mine, to feed my famisht Eyes.
The sickning light is envious, and grows pale,
With looking on her: it is a sight indeed
For the high mounted Sun, in all his Pride,
To stop, and wonder at -- let me fix here --
Stretch wide the Gates of sight to take her in,
In the full triumph of her conquering charms.
My eager Eyes devour her Beauties up,
Insatiable, and hungring still for more.
O! the rich Glutton, that enjoys this store!
Nothing to spare from superfluity,
To feed my wants, my Fever burns me up,
O! let me quench it at this healing Spring.
The Spring is sacred; a Divinity
Protects the place; thrice happy, happy, he
Who may plunge in, and bathe, and wanton there.
But I may taste the coolness of the stream.
And I will drink the Cordial of a kiss,
From this dear hand, reached out to comfort me.
She wakes!
What noise! I may retire unseen.

A Man here with my Wife! O give me way


Who Is there? my Lord?


Where is the Villain? where?


O! where indeed? my Father! on my knees
Let me protest, and swear my Innocence.
I am betrayed, and lost.

Thou art indeed.


This was contrived, and laid for his escape:
And this Apartment fitted, and prepared
To be the Scene of their adulterous Lust.
Where is there such another Wretch on earth?
Ruined, undone in every interest,
Betrayed, and ruined in my dearest trust!
But I will be the Executioner
Of my just rage, and here begin revenge --

Strike home, it is the Sword of Justice now.


Have you condemned her?


I applaud the deed.


I wonnot kill thee in thy Fathers sight.
That were to act a murder upon him.
Here, take her, Sir, I give her up to you.
Your Houses honor is engaged with mine.
Do with her what is fit for you, and me.
You are her Judge, condemn, or set her free.

LET Capua sink under the Rods of Rome:
Her Axes hew your Branches to the stock,
The Liteless trunk, never to sprout again.
The Gods appointment always is the best,
But every way your ruin will be just.

If all our Nobles are of your mind, what must become of the City in a little
time


It must become the injured Roman's spoil,
At the best, that, and you their faithless Slaves,
As you deserve, unworthy to be Friends.
Now, now the day of your account draws on.
The Roman Consuls come as Ministers
Of Wrath, and Terror to this guilty Town,
Armed with the kindled Justice of the Gods
Against your Crimes, with their avenging Bolts
From Heaven, and the devouring Flames of Hell,
To burn, destroy, and ruin you, and yours.
They have invested you with Fire, and Sword.
Famine, and Pestilence will follow soon
In the starved rear, to seize, and fasten on
Those Wretches, who just escape the stroke of War.
You have variety of Misery
Before you, in this siege, to pick, and choose
What Death you please, but think not to escape.
Your Hannibal has left you, with the Gods,
And all good Men, to sure perdition.

A sorry comforter --


Of the other side; no friend of ours; no matter what he says. He wishes it were
worse, if possible


Nay, it is even bad enough; and how 'twill be better I don't know.


We Are in a miserable condition, that is the truth on it, and which way to apply
our selves for a remedy --


Ay, that is the way, if we could hit on it.


Let Us to the Forum,
There we shall find our fellow Citizens,

We'll join with them, for something must be done.


What is it to me, my Country, Capua?
Who does maintain, or who deserts her Cause?
Favonia is the Province of my Care.
And her I have deserted, basely left,
How! basely! nay, abandoned to the Rage,
It may be, of a jealous Husband too.
Ha! whether am I hurried by my Fears?
Had I foreseen but half the Accidents,
That threaten now, what would I not have done?
I would have snach'd her from his cruel Hands.
And may do still. I will declare my Love,
Clear her suspected Honor to the World,
Or justify my Passion by Revenge.

Let him dispose of her, as he thinks best:
It was a Task unnaturally imposed,
And therefore willingly I lay it down.
Besides there is a public Conflict here,
Within this Breast, admits not private Cares.
Say, have you sent to Vibius Virius,
And Marius Blosius?

As you ordered, Sir.


And what?


They will come home to you.


It Is well.
Let no body disturb me, till they come.
They sent no News?

There Is none worth sending, Sir.


Worth sending! true, 'twill come it self too soon.
But we may boldly hear what we must feel.
It Is natural to enquire how the World goes --

Toward an end with us, it is to be feared,
And Capua, the Expedition is
Incredible, that carries on the Seige.

We often ask, in Cases of Despair,
When we are sure the Answer cannot please.

Hannibal tried to raise it, but in vain:
And now it is said that he is marched to Rome:
That way to draw the Consuls from our Walls,
To save their City, and defend themselves.

Leave me, and bring in what Reports you hear.
We cannot answer for unborn Events:
The Gods have placed 'em in the Hands of Fate,
To Shape, and Fashion for their high Decrees;
At their appointed time, to bring 'em forth,
To baffle human Wit, and Industry.
Else in the Course of Probability;
And as Appearances presented things,
Rome was to fall, and Capua was to rise.
But Fate, it seems, has otherwise ordained.
There is a secret Power within the Scene
That works unseen, and makes so quick a ch
I cannot stand the Taunts of bad Success,
And therefore wonnot meet 'em in the crow
I have hitherto been on the winning side.
We have another Game of Fortune now,
And I will loose as little as I can.
I cannot make the Figure that I would,
But need not make a bad one; that is in me;
If it grows worse, I know my Remedy.

No Tidings to comfort us?


Sad Times, sad Times, and running on to be worse, as fast as they can drive.


Did ever People fall from such a Pinnacle of Prosperity, unto such a Gulf of
Destruction, in so little a time


Never, never.


Our Sallys did something at first to hinder their Works, but to no purpose
now, they are beaten back upon every Attempt, and dare not look the Romans in the
Face


There Is no peeping upon the Walls.


The Engines play so thick, they are about your Ears before you are aware of 'em.


Not a Spade employed in the Trenches, but digs a Capuan Grave.


Wee'r in a sad Condition indeed.


There Is no Body to Command, but Bostar, and Hanno, the Carthaginians, and how
the Capuans obey them, you may believe


The Garrison fights hard for us, to save themselves; but they will pay their
Quarters before they leave us


They have brought us into the Crime, and wont forsake us in the Punishment.


Nay, they have done all they can for us with Hannibal.


And for themselves, for they must pay our Scores; but what was that all?


Why, they sent to him, to complain that he had abandoned the Town, and, as it
were, yielded it up himself to the Fury of the Romans; and withal beseeching
him, that he would come to their Relief, who were not only Besieged, but shut
up in the Works, and almost in the Hands of the Enemy


Upon which he came to look upon his Patients at a distance, shook his Head in
despair of our State, and went to Rome for better Advice


He sent us his Reason for so doing.


But the Consuls are here still, for all his Reason, and the Praetor too; their
Armies are not drawn off, as soon as Hannibal marched out of Capua, the Romans
came upon us, you know, as if they had hit the opportunity, they had been
aiming at solong; they did not come here to be drawn away by every Motion of
the Enemy


No, no, they wont leave us so.


Therefore my Advice is, either to try what our Despair can do, in making a
bold push, or take the Benefit of the Consuls Proclamation


What Is that? What does the Proclamation say?


It offers Life, and liberty to all those that surrender themselves in four and
twenty Hours


Why, ay, why don't we lay hold on the Proclamation?


At least let us stay for an Answer from Hannibal. Some Mauritanians have
undertaken, in the Name of Deserters, to get to him through the Roman Camp


And will be wise enough never to come back again. In the mean time, we stand
like Condemned Men, with the Halter about our Necks, but no body attempts any
thing for himself, or the Public


What would you have us do? The chief Citizens have shut themselves up in their
Houses, expecting their Ruin, with the Destruction of their Country


The Nobles have deserted us, and the Care of the Commonwealth.


Why then, in the first place, let us go, and set Decius Magius at Liberty.


Agreed, agreed; 'twas luckily thought upon.


He Is a good Man, and a lover of his Country.


And a Lover of the People.


Nay, he never quarreled with us, but for our Faults, when we deserved it.


If we had been governed by him, Friends --


Let us clap him up at the Head of the Government.


And his Enemies in his place.


We cannot do better.


And then we'll go about the City to Summon the Senate, and tell the Senators
plainly what they must trust to; that unless they assemble immediately to look
after the Public, we'll set their Houses on Fire about their Ears, and begin
with them in the Ruin of Capua


We'll Sacrifice them to their Country, rather then give up our Wives and
Children to the Enemy


And so we'll tell 'em plainly.


There Is nothing else to be done.


If we are to be Ruined, let it begin at our Betters?


It Is time enough for us, when it comes to our turn.
And I Will take my turn, though it be at the Gallows.

Why, that is well said, there is something to be expected from our honest
endeavors. Therefore all hands to Decius Magius


You know the rest, tell her that I am here.


Where are you? on the ground! it does become
The present Posture of your fallen Estate,
Fallen from the highest pitch of Happiness,
Into the lowest depth of Misery.
Yet I will raise you; would I could restore you
To the admired height, in which you stood,
Of Fame, and Virtue; but it cannot be.
As well I may refix a new fallen Star,
In his bright Orb, to light the World again.
I come to visit you.
I thank you, Sir.


I durst not trust you in a Father's Hand.


I have no Friend.


O! that the time should come,
That you should ever say you have no Friend,
When I am near you. Yes, you have a Friend,
A Friend you should not have, no more of that.
I am to tell you what a Friend you have lost:
And then compute your Gains.

I have lost all
That ever was of Value to my Peace.

You have destroyed all that was in your Power:
And you well know your Power to ruin me.
You Have thrown away a Husband, and his Love,
That followed you, as Nature does her Works;
To nurse, and raise you to Perfection.
Had all the good things of this Earth been mine,
And mine the Power to draw their Spirits off,
Into a Quintessence of Happiness,
I had bestowed the precious Draught on you.
And in return. --

O I could make you none,
To your Deserts.

In barbarous Return,
You have reached out the Gall of Bitterness
To dash my Cup, and poison all my Joys.
I could have sweetened it with my Revenge,
Which I restrained. I held your Father's Hand,
Stretched out to take away your guilty Life.
For when I heard he had pronounced your Death,
And Signed the Execution, though I knew
You had deserved it of my Wrongs, and Me,
I could not hold, but flew to your Relief.
And why? Is it because my Nature is
Insensible, and cannot feel a Wrong?
Stupid, and deadned to the Sense of Shame?
Or that I Am noted for my Easiness
In finding out Excuses to forgive?
And pardon faster than they injure me?
Is that the Reason that I rescued you?
You know me better, no, Favonia, no,
'Twas Pity came into the Place of Rage.
But do not therefore think that I am sit,
For my Disgrace, because I pitty'd you.
Justice her self-Condemns with a Remorse,
And pitty's while she strikes, besides I thought,
That you, and you, who for so many Years
Had lived, as Friends, should have a time to part.

O Misery! that I must nothing say
In my Defense, to clear my Innocence,

Hold, have a care, no more of Innocence,
Or a Defense, if you insist on that,
I shall break through the Temper I proposed,
And then I cannot say where I shall end.

Well, I have done.


Not but you have an Advocate still here,
Within this Breast, and not to be removed,
That in Defiance of a Cause so foul,
So desperate, and so lost, will yet be heard.
But then it does pretend but to advise,
And warn me to be cautious what I do,
Well to consider what I undertake,
Pondring to weigh the heavy Consequence,
And not revenge my self upon my self.
As that is the case, unless I am resolved.
Never to want what I would throw away.
And who can know his Resolution?
Who can be sure, that he is well enough
Acquainted with the Temper of his Heart.
To answer for its Proof and Constancy?
To know it is strength sufficient to support
So great a Loss, to bear a Loss, like yours?
The Loss of all, that ever I held dear.
A Loss, to beggar me, and all my Hopes.
These were the Thoughts that flew to your Relief,
And have preserved you for this Interview.

More terrible than Death it self to me.


You cannot think I come to pardon you.
No, all that I endeavor, or can gain
Upon my Wrongs, is to disarm my Rage.
And let it pass among the strange Effects
Of that commanding Power, you always had
Upon my Heart, that you are yet alive.
But I am still contriving my Revenge;
Still meditating how to punish you;
And I am in a way that pleases me:
It satisfies my Justice better too,
Than the Atonement of your spotted Blood.

There is no Remedy, no way to save
My Innocence, but by accusing him,
Who always has been dearer than my Life.
It must be he, that could pursue me there.
If he has escaped with safety, I am paid,
Though it is a heavy loss of Life, and Fame.

Here is a little Innocent, that comes
To Mourn with you: Soon as she can speak plain,
She Will tell you, it is an undone Mothers Loss
Has brought her hither, to be Nursed in Tears.

O! may she never know her Mothers Fate.


Nor the Dishonor of her Father, but
Inheriting her Parents Infamy,
She must grow up with the Disgrace, and Shame.
Look on her well.

My Eyes, and Heart are full of her.


Look on her as it were to be the last,
The last, last look that you may ever have.

This Object I would wish to close my Eyes.


You must remember how she has been bred,
The fondled Darling of our rival Loves.

Who are to strive in fondness of her now?
Who to supply a tender Mothers Care?

O! that the Reason of my Love should prove,
Should ever prove the reason of my Hate!
How have I hung upon the little Lines
Of that dear Face, with a fond Father's Joy,
To find the Mother there in Minature,
By Natures Hand Copied in every Look!
I prayed the God's she might resemble you,
And now abhor the Likeness I desr'd --
I cannot look upon her, but she brings
Her Mothers Crimes into my Memory --
When you are in your Grave, the sight of her
Will raise you from the Dead, to haunt my Peace,
To plague, and punish me, take her away.
I wonnot throw her out to Beggary,
But for your sake will neve see her more.

O miserable Woman! must I be
The Ruin of my Child!

Away with her.
Why am I not obeyed? Force her away.

O let her stay but for a parting hour --


No, not a Minute, not a Moments stay.


To take a farewell Kiss.


You Have seen your last of her.
Now she has wound her self about your Heart,
Now she has hold of all the Strings of Life,
Now tear her thence -- that you at last may feel
Some of the Tortures you prepared for me.

The God's must give me Patience to support
What they inflict, this is a thousand Deaths.

When I can entertain you at this rate,
I Will visit you again, in the mean time
You know your Lodging, I must see you in.
You Will have sufficient leisure to reflect
Upon the Follies that have brought you here.
You Have made your self unworthy of the World,
And therefore never shall appear again,
But live forlorn, immured within these Walls.
Who Is there?
I have your Father's Present yet to bring.
He sends a Dagger, and a poisoned Draught,
In your Extremity to comfort you.
When you are weary of this Slavery:
You have that wretched choice to set you free.

WE are met here, and only to be made
More certain of inevitable Fate:
Each Moment brings us Matter of Despair,
And no one to propose a Remedy.

The Mauritanians, who were hired, and sent,
And, as Deserters, undertook to pass
The Roman Camp, and get to Hannibal,
Discovered by the Consuls to be Spies,
Fifty in number were condemned to be
First stripped, and Scourged, then with their Hands cut off,
In that most lamentable plight driven back
To Capua, to let us see the News.

To let us see what we are to expect.


To let us read in bloody Characters
The Vengeance that is laid in store for us.

The Spectacle has sunk the People so,
They dare no longer think of a Defense,
And talk of nothing but Surrendering now.

This Accident has cut our Commerce off,
All our Intelligence with Hannibal.
We Have nothing farther to expect from him.

And the God's know, but little from our selves.
Within. Bear back, make way for our Deliverer.
Do you not know good Decius Magius.

O! Decius Magius! you are a welcome Man
Among us, you were never wanted more.

It Is a bad Day for Capua, when a Weak,
Old, useless Man comes to be wanted so.
But any thing is welcome in Distress.
I Am sorry for the Cause that brings me here,
Though it has brought me back to Liberty,
From Dungeon Darkness to the Heavenly Light.

We never were in such a wretched need.


I hear how Matters go with us, all wrong,
And fear me, it is too late to set 'em right.
My Power is very poor, but yet you may
Employ it, as you please, for Capua,
For I am still devoted to her Cause.

We cannot hope to have the Town relieved.


Nor are we able to defend it long.


The Roman Clemency has often been tried
On desperate Occasions, and been found,
When all has failed, the only Remedy.

And let us not despair of its effects,
Its good effects on us.

What do you mean?


To pacify the fury of our Fate.


Not to enrage it by opposing it.


But freely give what they have power to take.


We have agreed, the greatest part of Us,
To send our Legates to the Consuls Camp,
And offer up the Town, to save our lives.

And you are come, good Decius Magius,
The fittest Suppliant in your Country's Cause.

You have deserved, and you may well pretend
An Interest with the Roman Generals.

An Interest against their Interest!
There Is very little to expect from that.

We will surrender at discretion.


And that is but a wretched Embassy.
But if you think it is the only way
To do you Service, and you are agreed.

We are agreed there is no other way.


What says Pacuvius? You are yet to speak.


I would ill become my character, to join
In this advise of supplicating Rome,
In our distress, who, may be, was the first
To urge her Ruin, by deserting her.
But if I were no more obnoxious,
No more accountable for our revolt,
Than he that acted least, yet I must think,
From what we have done to them, and they to us,
There is no hope of pardon at their hands.

A Pardon! it is a Play-thing for a Child,
To still the present fit of frowardness;
A Man can never set his heart upon it.

Now, when a Foreign Enemy insults,
And Hannibal himself that Enemy,
When all things are permitted to the Sword,
Brandished, and flaming over Italy,
At such a time, forgetting Hannibal,
And every threatened danger, to send here
Both Consuls, with their Armies Consular,
Looks as they did intend to make their Wars
Only on us, not Carthage more abhorred
Than Capua, as if they did not come
For Fame, or Victory, but for revenge.

It may be so, and that they come to raise
A Monument, to warn succeeding times,
Never to injure, in whatever State
Their Fortune is, the Citizens of Rome.

The very Savages, and fiercest Beasts,
Do but approach their Dens, and they will leave
Their destined Prey, to save their helpless Young.
The Romans are more eager yet than they.
For not the leaguer of their City Rome,
Their Wives, their Children (whose imploring cries,
And lamentations almost reach 'em here)
Their Altars, Hearths, the Temples of the Gods,
The Sepulchers of their great Ancestors.
In danger to be violated all
By Hannibal, can once remove 'em hence,
From the determined spoil of Capua.
So greedy are they of our Punishment,
Of such a burning thirst to drink our Blood.
Therefore, for my part, I will seek no aid
Out of my self: while I am Master of
My liberty, I can take care for one.

You, who have made your selves unworthy of
Pardon, and mercy, justly may despair.
But we have hopes in Decius Magius.

Alas!


Take the three hundred Roman Knights
Along with you, that are our Prisoners.

That was a lucky thought, make all the Friends --


Adversity will find but very few.


What force you can.


And all, I fear, too weak,


You then, who seem to have another sense
Of what we owe to the Immortal Gods,
And our immortal selves, in these extremes,
I do invite you to take part with me,
In the kind entertainment of this Night,
Which I Have prepared for many more good Friends.
The Wine, and Company I know are good:
The Supper chosen well, and elegant:
For who can tell but it may be our last.
If it so prove; indulge the Genius,
Enlarge the Soul, and feast the senses high:
We'll sacrifice at last to Liberty.

O Junius! it is unworthy of the Man,
Who calls you Friend, so scandalous a Fate.
But do not think that I am reconciled,
Humbled, and tamed to my dishonor, no.

I know you cannot be wanting to your self.


I wanted to acquit my self to you,
And therefore I have found you luckily,
To go with me --

You may command your Friend.


To be a witness that I treat the Wretch
As She deserves from me, and my revenge.

A Fathers Present to a luckless Child!
His sending it, and by a Husbands hands,
Should have determined me, before this time,
In what I have to do, it is but to dye.
And that I Have meditated, studied long;
And often wished; but yet this Dagger here,
This Ruffian Dagger, like a Murderer,
That does delight in Blood, looks terrible.
There Is nothing horrid in this friendly Bowl:
And it will do the deed as certainly,
And satisfy my angry Fate as well.
It Is past; the little argument of Life
Is at an end; and Death will soon conclude.
This is the fatal period of our Crimes,
Ending at last in certain Punishment.
And yet my Crimes, methinks, might well have past
For my misfortunes, to be pitied,
Rather than punished; but I must not tax
The justice of the Gods; they have their ends
In every thing they do; they have thought fit
To judge 'em Crimes, and so to doom 'em here.
Perhaps to warn too negligent a World,
By my example, how they do engage
In little things, that may be dangerous.
If there is any profit of my Death,
It Is well, I do not grudge the benefit;
For I begin to find its comfort here.

Extended on the Floor; is this a sight
To triumph in?

The Dagger, or the Bowl,
Has rescued her, and disappointed me.
I fear she is almost got out of my reach.

She Is in the Pangs of Death.


There let her stay,
And linger Ages out in Agony,
To glut my Eyes, and satiate my revenge.

She Is going! O! Favonia! she is gone!


Why let her go, and with her all my Plagues.


I came to be a witness of thy Truth,
And Innocence; but should have come before
To save thy Life --

Methinks you are too much
Concerned for her.

Begone, and leave me here.
Your Title carried to the end of life;
No farther; you have put an end to that:
And now I honestly may set up mine.

What Title?


To revenge her Death on you.
You have involved me in this Murder here:
And made me an Accomplice of a deed,
To damn us both down to the lowest Hell.
If you dare justify it, draw your Sword.

Dare justify it?


Dare.


You know I dare.
Another Man had proved my daring too,
Before this time.

So every Coward says,


Nay, then it is past; this only answers that.


It Is as it should be: I was not to live.


I cannot long.


Then I have been a Friend
Indeed, if I have hastened on your Death.
For when I have confessed a few sad Truths,
You Will find I only have prevented you
From laying violent hands upon your grief,
Cursing the light, and falling to despair.

Your words have stuck attention in my heart.


Favonia is most innocent, and wronged:
And you, and I the only guilty here.

But prove her so, and I shall dye with joy.


In loved her, for I may avow it now,
And you may thank your self, who were the cause,
By bringing me into your Family.
I loved her with a passion, that no bounds
Could circumscribe, no violence could tame,
No Council moderate, no Friendship cure.
Therefore I went to Rome, resolved to breath
My sighs in Foreign Air, not to disturb
Your Interest, or Favonia's Innocence.
I languisht many Years; my Fate thought fit
To bring me back; and you would have me home.

In left her with you.


I that conflict, I
Confessed what I had suffered for my love:
She pitied me, and I desired no more.

Say on, while I have leisure to attend.


The Man you found in her Apartment, was
Your wretched Friend: I thought to 'scape unseen.
But that poor caution has undone us all.

What was your Business there?


I went to take
A parting look, resolved to end my griefs,
And trouble her no more. Favonia was
Even Innocent of my being there.
I found her sleeping with her harmless Thoughts:
And She but waked, as you approached the Room,
In a surprise, to find her self undone.
This Writing I have drawn to vouch for me,
In all the circumstances of this tale:
And the Gods try me by the Truth it bears.

A solemn adjuration! and no doubt
Most heavenly true; and all this is the work
Of my own folly; had I been content
With that fa^ portion of felicity,
The Gods beslow'd upon me in a Wife;
How happy had I been! but I must bring
My Friend home to usurp upon her right.
And what is the consequence! Ruin, and Death.
The approach of Death makes me less sensible.
I Have lost my Wife, and Friend, and now my self.

Who, who would basely lag behind in life,
Only to see how many wretched ways
Our Enemies will find out to punish us?

These Eyes shall never be Spectators of
My Countries Ruin.

Nor will I behold
The ravage, and the havoc of our Spoils --

Nor Capua's Honors trampled in the dust --


Nor shining horrid with involving Flames.


Shall our chaste Matrons, and our blushing Maids,
Our generous Youth, bred up to nobler hopes,
Attempted, seized, o'erpow'rd, be tamed at last,
To the insults of all unnatural Lusts?

If there was nothing else to undergo --


You cannot call it living on such terms.


If we agree, that Life would be a load,
Not to be Born, with these Indignities:
Here is the helping hand to throw it off.
This Bowl I have reserved to crown the Feast.
Hannibal carries Poison in a Ring,
Still to be near him in adversity.
I have prepared this cordial Draught for us.
A noble, and preventing remedy:
To free our Bodies from the Punishment,
Our Minds from the Reproach, and Infamy,
Our Eyes and Ears, from being Witnesses
Of all those Cruelties, that are designed.
Contrived, reserved, and wait for conquered Men.

We wonnot rob our Virtue of its Fame,
To think that any here can stand in need
Of words, to argue him into a deed,
Of this high consequence and character.

We are confirmed in reason, and resolved.


Then thus I offer you deliverance:
And do begin a Health to Liberty.

A generous Health, and send it round to all.


Fill all the Bowls at once, that we may join
In that most noble Pledge; let no Man have
Priority, or Place, in this last Scene,
But all unite in honor of the deed.

Let us unite our Hands, as well as Hearts,
In this great Work: and since we are to part,
We'll part like Friends, locked In a strict embrace.

I must not be shut out. I come to be
Admitted to the gallant Fellowship
Of your great Enterprise. I hear you are
Determined and resolved.
Give me a Cup
Among the rest.

It Is Poison --


Not to me.
Or if it should be so, I come to dye.

We'll show you then the way.


I Am old, and weak,
And cannot follow fast, unless you stay,
To take me with you in your Company.

We will.


I Am sorry to see you reduced to dye.


I Am sorry to see you reduced to live.


That would be poverty of Soul indeed.
It Is, not so poor with me.

I Am glad of it.


Pacuvius has drank his cordial off.


Secure me mine, and then at leisure, I
Will tell you the particulars at large,
Of what I went about; the Consuls doom;
And Capua's Fate --
But this delivers me.

And all of us.


Now we defy the Doom.
Pronounce it in the threatening Consuls words:
Tho it should thunder from the judgment Seat,
It shakes not us. We have our Pardon sealed.

I was not suffered to approach their Camp,
But as a private Person, and a Friend.
They utterly refused the Prisoners,
Disdaining to receive 'em, as a Bribe.
And would not hear me upon any terms,
That I could offer; all I could obtain,
Was to inform my self what they designed
To do with us.

It must be terrible.


Why, Fourscore Senators are condemned to Death.
Three Hundred of our noblest Families,
To be dispersed into the Latin Towns,
There to remain as Prisoners at large.
Our Treasure all confiscated to Rome, our Lands and public Buildings
forfeited
Capua to be disfranchis'd of her Rights,
Her Liberties, and her chief Citizens:
The Populace by outcry to be sold,
Into the several States of Italy;
And none permitted to inhabit here,
But Slaves made Free, Strangers, and meanest Trades:
Never to be incorporated more
In a Community, to have a Voice
In free Election of its Magistrates,
But live enthralled under the Scourge of Rome.

More dreadful far than Fire, or Sword could be.


It had been Mercy to extirpate quite
The Name, and Memory of Capua.

As to my self, it is true, they offered all,
All honorable terms for me, and mine.
But what is Honor, Fortune, when we have
No Friends, no Country, to rejoice with us?
I could not think of Life after that Loss,
Therefore came timely to prevent it here.

O Magius! let me witness to the worth,
I always envied. We have rivall'd long
For Capua's Love; but this last act of yours
Has forced me to confess it was your due.
Has thrown all emulation so behind,
The Honor of the Race is wholly yours.
Had I proceeded with that openess,
With that clear Spirit, in my Countries cause --

May be it had been better for us all.
This is no time for long Confessions.
If you have done amiss, amend it now:
And by the brave example of your Death,
Correct the influence of an ill spent Life.

I Have found this easy, honest way to Death:
The only way, my Friends, to vanquish Rome,
To rob her Consuls of their Triumph here,
And bear our selves the palm of Victory.

I thank the Gods I have lived long enough,
To all the reasonable ends of Life:
Lived to my Friends, my Country, and my Fame:
Have glutted Nature with satiety,
Tired all her various appetites of change.
And 'twou'd be an unmannerly return,
For my good cheer, and welcome of the Feast.
When I have sat it out, to grudge to rise.

We are all ready now to take our leave.


But one word more, and then I go with you.


She Is Innocent, and well provided for.


The Dead live after in the memory
Of those alive, so to be handed down,
Through all the Ages of Posterity,
As Tryers of their Fame; abhorred, or loved,
According to their good, or ill, in Life.

I would be mentioned only in my Death,


Let it be said of us, we would have died
To save our Country; since we could not that:
Nothing could tempt us to survive its fate.
Now lay us gently down.

What is thy News?


Our Gates are opened to the Enemy:
And Capua is no more.

Would it were so.
Better be nothing than be miserable.

Thou come too late to do us good, or harm,
By any News that thou can bring us now.

I pity our poor Friends that stay behind.
Our Minds are going to their native home.
And for the earthy part --

I Have taken care.
When we are honorably laid in Death,
My Clients have their orders to bestow
Our Bodies on a Funeral Pile, that is raised
On purpose, to preserve our last remains.

It Is well, now kindle it, and we shall mount
Up to the Skies, in the aspiring Flame,
And live Immortal in a glorious Name,


