WELL, Governor, I think I have Achieved, under thy Conduct, as considerable
a Character in as short a time --


Nay, you come on amain.


And, though I say it, have done as much --


And suffered as much.


For the Credit of my Country men, and the Reputation of a Whoremaster, as the
erran'st Rake-hell of 'em all


You're a pretty Proficient indeed, and so perfectly act the Cavalier, that
could you put on our Sex with your Breeches, of my Conscience, you would carry
all the Women before you


And drive all the Men before me; I am for Universal Empire, and would not be
stinted to one Province; I would be feared, as well as loved

As famous for my Action with the Men,
As for my Passion for the Women.

You're in the way to it; you change your Men as often as you do your Women; and
have every day a new Mistress, and a new Quarrel


Why, it is only the Fashion of the World, that gives your Sex a better Title
than we have, to the wearing a Sword; my constant Exercise with my Fencing
Master, and Conversation among Men, who make little of the matter, have at last
not only made me adroit, but despise the Danger of a Quarrel too


A Lady-like Reputation, truly. But how preposterously Fortune places her
Favors, when no body is the better for 'em


Why how now, Governor?


She seldom gives a Man an Estate, who has either the Conscience or Youth to
enjoy it --


But he may leave it to one who has.


An honest Man might be thankful for half your Fortune with the Women. But what
pleasure can you find in following 'em


The same that some of the Men find.


You cannot enjoy 'em.


But I may make 'em ready for those who can.


Are there such Sports-men?


Very many, who beat about more for Company, than the pleasure of the Sport;
and if they do start any thing, are better pleased with the accidents of the
Chase, the Hedges, and Ditches, than the close Pursuit of the Game; and these
are sure never to come into the Quarry


This is so like you now: Why Love should be your business; and you make a
business of your Love: You are young and handsome in Petticoats; yet are
contented to part with the Pleasures of your own Sex, to ramble into the
Troubles of ours. In my Opinion, you might be better employed


I do it to be better employed; to recommend me to Valentine, for whose dear
sake I first engaged in the Adventure; robbed my Keeper, that nauseous Fool
Golding, of Five hundred Pounds, and under thy Discretion, came a Collonelling
after him here into France


Why do you lose time then? Why don't you tell him so?


Thou would have had me, with the true Conduct of an English Mistress, upon
the first inclination, cloyed him with my Person, without any assurance of his
relishing me; enough to raise his Appetite to a second taste: No, now I am sure
he likes me; and likes me so well in a Man, he will love me in a Woman; and let
him make the Discovery if he dares


Let me (...).


To the Lodgings you shall; those I saw, and liked; they are Private, and
Convenient, make 'em ready; I Will tell thee all anon -- And do you hear -- my
Female Wardrobe too must be produced, my Woman's Equipage --


But sicken at that sound.


Valentine and Ilford are disappointed of their Bills, and in spite of their
good Estates want Money; now, though I lend upon the old consideration of
borrowing a greater Sum, Fifty Pieces are convenient


And will be welcome to 'em at this time --


Most certainly; and take this along with you, Governor; You must make your
Conversation necessary sometimes, as well as agreeable, to preserve a
Friendship with an Englishman


How Is this, Sir Antony? under the Discipline of your Governor, and his
Wisdom, this Morning


Like a good Christian, Valentine, clearing old Accounts, that I may begin a
new Score, with a better Conscience


Confessing, and repenting past Enormities --


About the pitch of thy Piety, Ilford, repenting only, because they are past.


So far you may repent with Honor.


Nay, I Confess my self a Child of this World; for at this moment I have a Hint
from my Constitution, that tells me the pleasure of thy Example --


Thou art above Example, or Imitation --


Will go near to overthrow the Wisdom of his Precepts; the Morality of thy
Beard, Governor --


But, Sir, it would be well.


It would be better, Sir, thou pitiful Preacher, would thou but follow thy
Pimping; it is a better Trade, and becomes thy Discretion as well: You Will find
me hereabouts --


You have Compounded for Whoring then, Sir Antony?


Any thing but Fighting; he has swing'd me away for my Quarrel yesterday in the
Tennis-Court


You deserved to be swing'd for it --


I should chide you too, though 'twas upon my account.


To run a Gentleman through the Arm, for not witnessing all you said in
Commendation of Valentine --


When he was not so much as acquainted with my Person --


Was --


Something more bold than welcome, I grant you; but I had not fought a great
while, my hand was in, and I was pushing at Reputation. For, I Gad, I look upon
Courage to proceed more from Habit and Practice, than any Virtue of the Mind


How (...) Sir Anthony (...) something in Family (...) --


Wooden Legs, in a great many, Valentine.


Courage often runs in a Blood --


They say so of the Pox, indeed. The Sins of the Fathers may run in the Blood
sometimes, and visit the third and fourth Generation: But their Virtues dye
with the Men. And if the Example, and Custom of the World (supported by good
eating and drinking) had not infused a nobler Spirit into the Blood, than any
derived from the Father; most Men had continued like those, who stay with their
Fathers; Elder Brothers all; and had never offered at an Intrigue, above a red
Petticoat; or a Quarrel, above a Rubber at Cuffs


It Is sensibly extravagant, and wild!


Inimitably new! But how do you to avoid Drinking?


Why that avoids me, thanks to the Custom of the Country, and the better
Diversions of this Place; not but I can arrive at a Bottle too


If you were in London --


There I grant you -- Where the young Fellows begin the Reputation of their
Humor and Wit in a Pint Glass, carrying 'em, without intermission of sense or
jest, to the end of the third Bottle; and then through the public places, and
folly of the Town


There you would be at a loss.


I should indeed; where they go to Taverns, to swallow a Drunkenness; and then
to a Play, to talk over their Liquor


I thought that folly fell off with their Fathers --


The Entertainment of it did indeed.


Who, as they began it in their Frolic, supported it in their Wit.


And since the Sons are so plainly disinherited of the Sense, they have no
Title to the Sins of their Fathers


Unless they kept 'em more in Countenance.


Yet they would do something, like their Fathers.


As an ignorant Player in England, whom I saw undertaking to Copy a Master
Actor of his time; began at his Infirmity in his Feet; and growing famous for
the imitation of his Gout, he could walk like him, when he could do nothing
else like him


The Gout, and the Pox take him for it --


And all those, I say, who, only from their Opinion of themselves, are
encouraged to meddle in other Men's matters, without ever bringing any thing
about of their own


Aye, those meddling Fools, Ilford! who are in all places, yet ever out of their
way --


And not only out of their own way, but always in other Men's --


And still as ridiculous as a Fellow of thy Severity and Reserve would be in
the fantastical Figure of a Lover


Whoever has the Woman; you have your Wit, Sir Antony --


They go together, Sir -- You Will find it so.


Whom have we here?


A (...)about him!


One of that traveling Tribe, without their Circumcision.


Of Christian Appellation, a Pilgrim.


It Is a senseless Constitution of Men!


Who make themselves Mad, to make the rest of the World Fools, by finding a
Faith for all their Fopperies


How can they pass upon the World?


As other Constitutions, and Orders of Men as senseless, pass; that are founded
too in as much Cozenage and Roguery as this can be


You are an Enemy of Forms, Sir Antony.


Oh, Sir, the Virtue of the Habit often covers the Vices of the Man: There Is
Field enough in England to find this in, without the Abby-lands, Gentlemen


Weeds are the general growth of every Soil.


How many Fools in the State, and Atheists in the Church, carry themselves
current through their Congregations and Clients, to great Emyloyments; and, being
armed only with the Authority and Countenance of their Clothing, secure
themselves from the discovery and sensure of the Court and Town


These are Disguises, I grant you, worth a sensible Man's putting on; but a
Pilgrim's Habit is as ridiculous as his Pretense; and I would no more wear a
Fools Coat, to be thought devout; than be devout for the sake of the Livery


Fools are the Guts of all Churches, and make the Bulk of every Opinion.


Hang him, let him pass; spare him for the sake of the Church, and spare the
Church for the sake of our Abbe


Who is, indeed, a most considerable Pillar of it, to his own profit, and our
pleasurable living in this Town


He is a very Pope in Mompelier, the Head here --


And a fit Head he is for such sinful Members as we are.


We Members! You are a Protestant, Sir Antony.


You may be surly enough to tell 'em you are one; but I am always of the
Religion of the Government I am in --


And of the Women you converse with, Knight.


And when I cannot convince 'em, I conform.


A very civil Character of a fashionable Conscience.


Of a sensible Man, I think: Why must your Capacity be the Measure of another
Man's Understanding? And all Men be in the wrong, who don't dance in the Circle
of your Thoughts


Every Man a Villain, or a Fool, who does not fall into your Notion of things?


No Opinion ever sprung out of an Universal Consent; Truth can no more be
comprehended, than Beauty: We have our several Reasons for the one, and Fancies
for the other. And as Beauty has not the same influence upon all Complexions;
so Reason has not the same Force upon all Understandings: We embrace what
pleases us in both, secure our selves in a probability, and guess out the rest


Ilford is one of those Fellows, whom if you divide from in one thing, will
never close with you in any. Tho the Abbe and you do differ about the way to
Heaven, you may go to the Devil together, I warrant you


However wide we may be from his Opinion of the other World, I Am sure he joins
with us in our Opinion of this


For my part, I regard the Man, not his Religion; and if he does my Business in
this World, let him do his own in the next


Nay, Gentlemen, I have as honorable an Opinion of the Abbe, as you can have:
I know there is nothing to be done without him --


That the Conversation of the best Families in Mompelier runs through his
Reformation --


That some of our Fortunes --


All our Fortunes --


Yours particularly with Floreante, at present depending upon his Favor,
against the Authority of her Father --


And the Quality of my Rival, Count Verole.


No Dancings, no Balls, no Masquerades, in a sweet Circle of Society, as it has
been, from one Good House to another, without his Introduction and Gravity to
qualify the Scandal


Substantial Reasons for our Respect.


Weighty Motives all for our Attendance.


Are they so, Sir? No more of your Protestant then, if you would not be damned
for a Heretic, by the Women in a Catholic Country


We should have been at our Patron's Levy, Gentlemen.


He Will bate us us the Ceremony: You're going to visit him?


You must along with us.


I Will follow you.


You are his Favorite; we are no body without you --


The support of our interest with him.


Business, Business, Gentlemen.


Pox of your Business --


'Twill end in that -- prithee let him go; a Whore I warrant you -- Whore; more
prostituted too, to Knaves and Fools: Yet my grave Friend, you will have a share
in both, or I mistake your Nature


You are answered.


Indeed my little Friend is so far right, Money, and Whore, make one another
use; either is dull alone


This Pilgrim here again!


He follows us; what would he have?


Your Charity, good Gentlemen.


Prithee leave us; there is Charity in my Advice to thee, not to lose thy
labor; besides, we are Englishmen; and never think of the Poor out of our own
Parish


Nor there neither, but according to Law, and when we cannot help it.


Charity is a Free-will-Offering, and we part with nothing we can keep, I
assure you --


Not so much as our sins.


Especially at this time --


Unless it be to live upon 'em.


Alas! what pity it is, that Gentlemen so much in debt --


That we shall never pay --


To Heaven --


And other Creditors.


Of Youth so sweet, of Form so excellent --


You or me, Ilford? Who does he mean?


So finished, by the great Creator's Hand, I worship him in thee.


As thou do the King's Picture in his Coin --


In hopes of getting by it.


You are so fashioned --


For a Sinner.


And by Natures Hand designed --


A Whoremaster.


You cannot want --


Women? No, Pilgrim, I shall not want 'em, in thy Acquaintance, I Am sure.


You cannot want Grace, the Beauty of the Soul, the Accomplishment of Virtue to
the work: You cannot wan't Chairty; for Charity is called our Gratitude to
Heaven --


You call it so.


You would not be Ungrateful?


I would not be a Fool, nor imagine such an Ass as thou art could ever be
Commissioned, a' God's Name, to collect the Revenues of this World --


Nor to Convert (those Deodands of Devotion) the public Charitable Endowments
of Bigoted, or Dying Fools, to the private Luxury of your own Lazy Tribe


We build no Churches, Pilgrim, nor found Hospitals, but in our own Country;
nor there neither, but to Father our own Bastards


Your Mendicant Women-Saints, we allow off indeed: All our Charity runs through
their Devotion


Soft little Hands become an Offering, and those we often fill.


Are you so lost.


To all that thou can say.


Thy Godliness may Convert others, though it does nothing upon us.


What can I do for you?


Pimp for us.


I will Pray for you.


Do It in a Corner alone then,


I may join with you in yours, before I have done; the Abbe will not fail me.


I have my hands full, Gentlemen; but my Trade is settled, my Correspondence
easy, my Factors employed, and my Returns will be quick


Pray make 'em so; and come as soon as you can to us.


I sail with every wind, in the Teeth of Fortune sometimes.


Have a care of being bit, Sir Antony.


I (...) older Sinner. Valentine I warrant you --


You may venture him: He has nothing to lose, that I know of, but his Youth;
and that wonnot long support the expense of the life he leads


He loses no time, indeed.


But misemploys a great deal, in my Opinion.


Youth will have its Sallies.


The Sallies of his Youth will sooner lead him to Repentance and the Pox, than
to his Manor of Love-dale, as he calls it


His Mansion House in Glocestershire.


His Castle in the Air, which no Man ever heard of, till he was pleased to
fancy, and Christen it, for the Seat of his Family


Then you don't believe him a Barronet, of twelve hundred pounds a year, under
Age, and upon an Allowance for his Travel, from his Guardians


I believe he may have been some Court Page, spoiled first by the Confidance of
his Lady, in knowing her Secrets; then coming early into the iniquity of the
Town, by the merit of his Person, and impudence, has since made a fashionable
Livelihood, out of Women and Fools


I don't know who he is, or wat he has: If he be no Knight, he is a pretty
Fellow, and that is better: And if he has not Twelve Hundred Pounds a Year, he
deserves it, and does not want it: Which is more than you can say of most of
your Knights, that have that Estate, I Am sure


Nay, that I grant you too.


He lives as like a Gentleman, has all things as well about him; is as much
respected by the Men, and better received by the Women, than any of us


He Is a pretty Woman's Man indeed.


And a merry Man's Man too, Sir; for you must own, he has a great deal of Wit.


Pretty good Natural Parts, I confess; but a Fool has the keeping 'em, no
Judgment in the World; and what he says, comes as much by chance --


As Epicurus's World did; Perfect, and Uniform, without a Design.


He flies too much at random to please any Man of Discretion.


There is indeed the Quarrel of Twelve Years difference, between thy
Discretion, and his Wit. He may live up to thy Discretion, George, but we shall
neither of us arrive at his Wit


How long will his Wit support him?


That must be his Care, and not our Business: I never examine any man's
Pockets, that is not troublesome to mine


If he be not troublesome, his Necessities may throw him upon some scandalous
Action --


That may require thy Bailing him?


That may reflect upon us.


O! thou were always tender of thy Reputation, when thou were to pay for the
Scandal, I Will say that for thee, Ilford: But if want of Money be a Crime;
Heaven help the guilty: We are disappointed of our Bills at present too


But we have Letters of Credit, and may use 'em upon occasion.


And (...), which he may use too, upon Occasion; for I am so far from
apprehending he may, that I am resolved he shall want nothing I can oblige him
in, Pocket or Person


O! Sir, you need not doubt his giving you an opportunity of showing your
Gallantry in that part of your Friendship; he will borrow Money of you, warrant
you


And he shall have it, though I borrow it for him. But, Sir, you had not always
this slight Opinion of Sir Antony


I did not always know him.


Nor he the Abbe's Niece.


I found him out but lately.


For your Rival.


His Vanity, Extravagance, and general Pretension to Women, are intolerable --


Especially when the gayety of that Humor is likely to get the better of your
formality, in Volante's esteem: He is your Rival


My Rival!


And I don't wonder, you don't like him.


He Is a general Undertaker, indeed; and in that part of his Conversation, is as
impertinent to the Women, as in other things he is troublesome to the Men: So I
think it would be our common good Fortune to get rid of him


I am not of your mind: And here he comes to convince you.


Just as I left you! You scorn to stir an inch out of your quality, to put your
selves in the way of Fortune, though you know her to be blind


You meet her at every turn, Sir Antony.


She must come home to you to be welcome.


When do you bring her home?


But you may be sullen, and sour, domineer, threaten your Stewards, and talk
loud at a Disappointment; you are in possession, Gentlemen

My Guardians will not be so served: My Governor teaches me to provide against
Accidents: What I want of my Age, I must supply with my Diligence


And have your labor for your pains.


I can take pains, Sir, and the profit of my pains, Sir; Fifty pieces in a
Morning, Sir, the price of my pains, and give the Lady a penniworth into the
Bargain


How! Fifty Pieces?


From a Woman, Sir Antony?


Nothing, Sir, a trifle.


Your Mistress pays like a Widow --


That had lost her Youth upon a Husband, and the hopes of a Jointure --


And just delivered, would redeem the folly of the past, by the enjoyment of
what is to come --


In a sober Resolution, of making the price of her penance, the purchase of
her pleasure --


By refunding upon a young Fellow, what she had wheadl'd from an old one.


I warrant her old, and ugly, by her Pension.


She Is young enough to be a Maid, handsome enough to be a Mistress, cunning
enough to be a Wife, and rich enough to be a Widow


Faith, she comes down --


Deeper than I can, I assure you.


She pays well, I Will say that for her.


And is well -- I Will say that for her.


And does every thing well.


You would say that for her, Valentine? And she does every thing well; that way
she is a Widow, I promise you


Take us into your Assistance.


We are Friends, and will stand by you.


We are out of Employment that way --


And would Journey-work under you.


Any thing to be wicked, Gentlemen: But, Ilford, thou art honorably in Love,
and have it too much in thy head, to have it any where else. Besides, she is so
much of my humor, she will never relish thine


She must not go out of our Family.


She Is handsome and convenient; as able to answer all our wants, as all we are
to satisfy the importunity of hers


Well; I am satisfied, I am her Man.


Or any Woman's Man, who wants to be satisfied.


She must like me, for being of her Opinion, in liking thee.


That indeed may do something, and time may bring it about: In short, this is
the English Lady you have heard me speak of: I allow her the favor of my
Person; and she allows me the freedom of her Purse: And I am glad I command it
so luckily, to answer the Occasions of my Friends


You can command nothing we can have occasion for.


By your Pardon, Sir, you may be too proud to be obliged; but I have occasion
for the Money and Woman too, so as you were saying, Sir Antony --


Why, I still say a true bred Englishman is ever out of humor when he is out
of Pocket: He knows no more how to want Money, than how to borrow it --


And when he does, is as surly in borrowing, as others are in lending Money.


It Is almost as dangerous too, to offer him Money, as to lend Money to another
Man: For he is as likely, out of a want of Sense, to suffer your Courtesy; as
a Stranger, out of a want of Honesty, never to return it


That way, indeed, our Countrymen take care, never to think themselves obliged:
We can be ungrateful --


And cheat our Benefactors of their good Offices, by an Ingratitude, almost
natural to us; and that makes a tolerable amends for our want of the more (...)
Villainies of warmer Countries


But the Lady, Sir Antony --


More of the Lady at leisure; in the mean time, here are Fifty Pieces of hers,
too keep up your Fancy: If your Occasions require a greater Sum -- she shall
supply you --


And I Will supply her.


Upon your Bond, for the payment of the whole to her in England --


By all means.


A Blank Bond, because she would not be known here.


With all my Heart, but will not she take a Gentleman's Word?


O yes, when she has his Bond for the performance. When our surly Friend is
Civil enough to be obliged, I have a Twin-Purse at his Service too


You are very much out of his Favor of late.


So I find: What Is the Matter with the Fool?


How have you disobliged him?


But he is in Love, and consequently an Ass.


And I believe Jealous of you.


Faith I Will give him Cause. Volante is as fit for my purpose of Tormenting him
that way, as I could wish. Shall we to the Abbe, Gentlemen


Golding! An Englishman?


So his Servants tell me, Sir.


Just come to Town, say thou?


He has not peeped abroad, since his coming, Sir.


Do you know any such Gentleman, Valentine?


I did; a considerable Coxcomb of that Name, in England; a Knight, Sir Gentle
Golding. Sir Antony, you may have known him too


I have heard of him. If this should prove my Coxcomb Governor.


But Damn him, he has not Courage enough to cross the Channel.


I know he is in France, I heard of him at Paris.


Faith, Sir, it must be the Man --


Whom we must manage then.


Why do think so?


Your Description is so like him, Sir.


Why, have thou found him out --


For his Father's Son, and his Mother's Fool.


And our Fool, Gentlemen: If he be a Fool, I Will have my Snack of him.


There Is enough for you all, without wronging the Family, as he will quickly
convince you. He knows you, Sir --


Then it is the very Fool.


And designs to wait upon you.


At his Peril be it: I owe him a Revenge, for Lucia's sake.


Is this the Spark?


That bought her of her Aunt --


Now for my Character.


When she was yet too young, to Judge between the Fortune and the Fool.


That Is some Excuse however.


A little time showed her, her senseless Bargain.


So I hear.


Which, she repenting, gave you the cheaper Penniworth of her Person: Then was
the time --


That I was in France; out of the reach of any other Pleasure, had she designed
me any, than the bare News, that she had found him out, loathed, and abhorred
him


Loathing and Abhorring, are Tokens of Mortification indeed: But Penance is
not enough for such a Fault; it is generally as short lived, as the Sin that
begot it. What marks of Amendment has she since given


What marks of Amendment would you have?


I know nothing of her Amendment.


Would you have her Snivle, like a Girl; more afraid of her Mother, than the
Sin; and cry, forgive me this one slip, I Will do so no more --


Repent upon the first Intrigue --


Turn Honest, and disparage the Pleasure, by leaving the Trade.


That must not be.


By no means, Valentine.


Would you have her already fall off --


Become a Civil Person --


And take up --


With some body that better deserves her; that way I would have her a Civil
Person, and fall off from her Fool


Indeed a Woman never repents of a Fool so heartily, as in the Arms of a Man of
Sense


How Fortune has disposed of her, I know not; but I liked her once so well, I
would have her still preserve my good Opinion of her Conduct: If she has
managed her Monster, as he deserved, she has made Money and Mirth of him; and
me some Amends for the loss of her, by mending her Condition


If that will preserve your good Opinion of her, she will continue it: For I
hear she has used him as ill, as you could desire from your Revenge; or the
Town expect from their Hopes of a Libel


Then I honor her.


She has robbed him of Five Hundred Pounds, run away from him; and so exposed
him, that he has been the common Rhyming Theme, the Hackney Pegasus for the
Puny Poets to set out upon, in their vast Ambition, of arriving at a Lampoon


And that perhaps has sent him into France.


Well, I will have her Knighted.


Of what Order? A Knight Errant, or an Errant Knight?


A Knight Errant, of thy Order, she must be.


That she is already.


And thee a Right Honorable, for thy News.


You may depend upon it.


If ever I light on her, I Will thank her for this Justice to us all.


Golding may tell us more of her.


So he may, you, Sir, wait at our Lodgings for him,
And direct him to the Abbe's, if he comes:
We'll laugh at him, if we do nothing more.

But he and I must clear another score.


BRother, you may forget your self, and your Rank, as much as you please, in
our Niece Volante: I have nothing to do with her, but to wish her well


It Is very well.


You are her Guardian: Her Person, her Fortune, and her Conduct are in your
Care


I Will take Care of 'em.


You must answer for 'em.


I will answer for 'em.


But my Daughters are under my Government; and whilst they are, they must, nay
shall do nothing to dishonor me


They will do nothing to dishonor you.


I Will put it out of their Power, had they a mind to it.


They have no such Mind.


That Is more than I can tell, from the Liberties you give these Englishmen in
our Family --


They are Gentlemen.


I apprehend a Danger, though you will not.


Pugh, pugh, there is no danger.


I Will prevent it, if there were.


All Men of Fortune, in their Country.


They are not Men of Quality. Would Count Verola were come.


Don't do so rash a thing.


I Will rid my self of all my fears at once; dispose my youngest Daughter in a
Nunnery, and instantly marry Floriante --


To make her more miserable.


Suitable to her Birth.


To a Fool, the worst of Fools; a Singular, Opinionated, Obstinate,
Crooked-temper'd, Jealous-pated Fool


If he were so, that Fool's a Count; and the Count makes amends for the Fool.


Then he is welcome --


What says the Abbe?


Sir, you are most welcome.


I shall be glad to find it from the Man I so much honor --


For his Title,
That Is all this Fellow thinks worth honoring.
Hang 'em, they make me Grave --
But that a Brother of my Blood should choose a Coxcomb out --
But if my Brother prove a Coxcomb too,
That Wonder's over --
Then it is their mutual interest to join;
Each likes the other to excuse himself.

Ah, Monsieur L'Abbe.


You have prevented us.


We were going to visit you.


In Nomine Domine, Amen.


The Abbe making his Will!


Amen to our Abbe's Devotions.


You fall as naturally as a Parish-Clerk, into the close of a Prayer.


I love to bring things to a good end.


Nay I have done; my Devotion will not tire your Attention.


You are like the Prelate, that being dignified for long Prayers, hated them
ever after


Long Prayers are for poor Priests that want Preferment, Men of Quality rise
without 'em


In Men of your Rank they are Pharisaical, and always to carry on a Design.


I neither have a Faith in them nor their Followers; and therefore I seldom or
never pray at all


How! never Pray at all?


The Church and I are agreed upon the Bargain; and few words are best, when the
Parties are of a mind


But the Church may better your Bargain.


I am mortified to the Dignities and Designs of the Church; have laid aside the
Pomp and Pride of my Profession, I am contented to sit down in a Sine-Cure;
and, with the poor pittance of 2000 Pistols a year, make the most of a good
Conscience and good Company


A good Conscience is good Company indeed.


I mean, Sir, I Will make a Conscience of good Company --


Make the best of the Blessing, and enjoy it as long as you can.


Ah! my little Knight understands me, though you will not, Sir.


You Will anger him --


He jumps into the Point with me.


And into the Company too, dear Abbe; I must make one.


Make one, thou make all; you are all in all; the whole Company thy self;
thou art every thing with every body; a Man among the Women, and a Woman among
the Men


How Abbe! Sir Antony a Woman?


One might indeed mistake him, by his Face.


He would mistake him, I believe.


Somewhere else.


But there is no faith in Faces; the Women have found him out, and will not trust
him


Ay, ay, the Women Abbe, the Ladies --


As mad as ever they were, my Nieces you mean!


I long to be among 'em.


Nay, they long too, if that would do 'em any good. And think it long.


I have not spoke to a Woman this half hour.


We are all idle without you.


Sin has been as silent among us.


As in the first Session of a Parliament, in fear of a Reformation.


Ah! very well, I faith, my little Man. But no, no Reformation, I warrant you;
matters shall not be much mended by my Management; Sin must sometimes get the
better of the Saint


Or the Devil may still wear black, Sir.


Let him wear what he will: We have had him in our Family this Morning.


What Is the matter?


My Brother has discovered something between you, and his Eldest Daughter.


That Is unlucky.


Which to prevent, he designs to Marry her instantly to Count Verole.


That Is bad indeed.


What is there to be done?


Nothing that I know of.


What Is to be done? Any thing's to be done?


What if I run away with her?


With all my heart.


Or if I cut his Throat.


With all my heart.


Or Bedridden him with a beating.


With all my heart.


If none of these will do, let him Marry her.


And I must say with all my Heart.


If you cannot make her your Wife, make him your Cuckold.


With all my heart.


Ah! if I durst but hope that way.


Hope, you must hope Man, and you must dare Man, if you would do any thing with
the Women


Can you encourage me?


Why, Faith, whatever her Father designs, shes does not design to Marry him:
And Disobedience may make way for other Sins


I know she hates him.


And I know she likes you. And if I have any Authority from the Church --


Which is not to be disputed.


Or any Interest from my Estate --


Which must be considerable --


Not to be opposed --


And which must furnish the better part of her Fortune, he shall not have her.


That Is gaining time at least.


He Is naturally jealous.


And has settled that Nature by a Spanish Education, they say.


He was bred in Spain indeed.


A miserable Woman she must be then.


I would not have a Niece of mine married into a Family, or Nation, where, if
she dislike her own Man, she can have no body else


Our Women are the happy Women, Sir.


Why, indeed your Englishmen are the fittest Men for Husbands in the World!
Would all my Female Relations were married into your Country


Would they thought as well of us, as you do.


There is a Lady quarrels at her Condition, or likes another Man better than
her Husband; which sometimes may happen, you know


Such things have happened indeed.


There they say Cuckoldom is in fashion.


Nay, more than in fashion, Sir, it is according to Law; Cuckoldom is the
Liberty, and a separate Maintenance, the Property of the Freeborn Women of
England


We give our Women fair play for it.


And scorn any Tie upon 'em, more than their Inclinations.


Why, what would a Lady ask more in Marriage? I Will maintain it, such a
Privilege is better than her Dower; and in a prudent Woman's thoughts, must
take place of any other Consideration


It Is as much before a Dower in Profit too, as in time; for a Husband may cheat
a Wife of her Dower


Or wear out her Title by out-living her; and then she is bob'd of her
Reversion


Or leave her so old, she may be past having any good from it.


Unless she lays it out in redeeming some younger Brother --


That had spent his Annuity in a Lord's Company --


Or in following a Common Whore --


Or in following as Common a Mistress, the Court.


And being reduced to the last Fifty, had ventured it prudently on a Birthday
Coat, and the Hopes of an Employment


One, who in spite of having been once undone, will have no more profit from
his Experience, than to fall into the same folly again, with the same occasion


Then hang him for a Fool, enough of him -- I am convinced with what you say,
Gentlemen: And you shall have my Niece, you have her Consent, and my Consent,
and Sir Antony's good Word; which I promise you, goes a great way with the
Women


Your Niece Volante is her Confident.


I Will make her your Friend.


I Will secure her for you.


Why you secure her?


For such a favor, Sir, I think I may.


Your Interest is mighty.


So far I can engage her.


You engage her!


Nay, oblige her.


Her Friendship may oblige her, but not you.


Pray don't quarrel about obliging her; Volante is my Favorite, she shall
please her self, and I believe would please Sir Antony -- Gentlemen, you are
three, and my Nieces are three; I will not meddle in your Choice; agree among your
selves; win 'em, and wear 'em; I had rather you should have 'em, than my
Brother dispose of 'em


Sir, you oblige us all.


Our Dinner stays for us, we'll settle those things within: I have almost
forgot the extraordinary Part of my Entertainment, I have a Pilgrim for you


We have had him already.


And our share of laughing at him too, Sir.


He pretends to be a Man of extraordinary Sanctity; I meddled with that as
little as I could, for fear of raising a Spirit I could not lay; besides, I had
matters of more moment to mind then


How did you get rid of him?


With much ado I put him and his History off, telling him, some English
Heretics were to Dine with me --


We are obliged to you, Sir.


And if he pleased to spare that miraculous Account, (which he will be sure to
give of himself) for the Conversion of the Wicked, he might then have a proper
occasion for so great a Design


I should think the worse of my Constitution as long as I lived, if I should
grow qualmish of any thing he could say to me


I knew I must hear him, and therefore provided your Conversation to qualify
his


The Novelty may divert us.


He professes more Charity, than to force his Nonsense upon you.


That Punishment I must go through, before he will go away, and pay for my
Penance too


At the expense of his Vow of Poverty.


Pray Gentlemen, along with me.
I don't desire you to believe all he says.
Take what you like, and laugh at all the rest.

Why, there our Christian Liberty's confessed.


Would we had never a more imposing Priest.


One word before you go.


Prithee come along -- no Cautioning in such a slight Affair --


I am glad you think it such a slight Affair.


Mere merriment.


I never thought it more.


Matter of Mirth, and Jest.


Nay, that is too much.


Upon a foolish Pilgrim.


Upon Volante.


Volante! Thou talk of Volante, and I answer thee, the Pilgrim: Why thou art
distracted, Man; and I shall suspect my self to be no wiser than I should be,
for keeping thee Company


Sir, however you think to carry it, I must tell you --


With a very Grave Face --


This is no jesting time --


Because it is a ridiculous Subject.


That I am in love --


In serious sadness.


With that Lady.


That never was sad, nor serious in her life: Prithee, no more of this, Ilford,
in Love! Thou art a very honest Fellow, and have a great many good Qualities,
but thy Talent lies quite another way


Sir, I am serious enough to be angry, if you laugh at me.


But you are in Love with her, you say: Why every body that sees her, is in
Love with her, if that would do any good; but is she in Love with you


I think my Estate may recommend my Person to a Welcome, wherever I pretend.


Does she think so?


Why do you ask the Question?


Volante is too Witty, to be very Wise; and requires no Settlement, but her Man.


And why may not I be her Man, pray?


Fie, Fie, Sir, more Modesty might become a Man of your Gravity! You her Man! No,
no, she is otherwise disposed of, I assure you


What, you follow her!


Nay, you follow her; she does not put me to the trouble.


No, Sir -- I shall put you to more trouble, if you don't quit your Pretensions
to her --


Quit my Pretensions to her!


And promise me --


I will promise you --


O, will you so, Sir?


That (whatever I would have done by fair means) I will now follow her in
spite of your Teeth --


In spite of my Teeth --


Pursue her, till she yield to my Desires --


The Devil you will!


And lie with her under your Nose.


You shall be Damned first.


Nay, then have at the Lady.


This was a Trick to save his Cowardice.


I had rather part with my Pretension to a Quarrel, than to my Mistress at any
time


I hope you are not hurt.


Sir, you assert a Privilege, the Lady never gave you, of Treating her at that
Familiar rate


At what familiar rate?


Sir, you may be respectful, look simply, and bow at a distance, in a Modest
Despair, of ever coming nearer to please; but I am for a closer Conversation,
when I like my Company


I am sorry, Sir, my Carriage gives Offense; but I must think you treat me more
familiarly, that saucily should dare to censure me, limit my Actions, and
prescribe me Rules


A Foolish Fellow, Madam, not worth your Anger; leave him to his Repentance,
and your Scorn


I must bear it all.


But pray, how came this Difference?


'Twas your Quarrel, Madam.


I am sorry for it.


You may judge what a Husband he will make, who (being but a Servant) dares
assume an Authority over you --


Which I never gave him, that I remember.


I told you, you were out of the Road of her Favor.


The Report of this Quarrel, and the Occasion of it, will be but a scandalous
addition to my Fame, when it comes to be the Tattle of the Town


It shall go no further for me.


I suppose the folly on it will keep you silent; you may be ashamed on it indeed.


I beg you Pardon for it.


Beg, Sir Antony's; for till he pardons you, I am sure, I will not.


There is no Remedy, you must submit.


I am a Woman's Fool, and must obey.


It Is many a Wise Man's Fortune.


We are Friends.


If you have Favors to expect from me, deserve 'em by fair means.


Or come to me, and I Will speak a good word for thee to the Lady.


You Triumph, Sir.


Till when, we take our leaves.


Pox! I deserve it all,
For putting it into her Power to use me so:
He Is Ten Years younger than I am,
And consequently so much handsomer in her Eye:
He prates a great deal more, and better than I do
For her purpose, and therefore lies better in her Ear:
He has the Advantage of me, in every Vanity
That can betray a Girl; Volante's a Girl,
And what could I expect for my honorable Love for her?
When, in the weakness of a Woman's Choice,
She will prefer the present laughing hour
To all that can come after.
If this would cure me now, 'twere a Lesson well learned:
I Will hear what the Pilgrim can say upon this Subject;
I Will listen to his Lies, they are less mischevious,
And may drive this Woman out of my Head.

Is not that Sir Antony?


With my Cousin Volante.
We shall have 'em at the turning of the Walk.

They are proper Counselors for our purpose of Disobedience --


As we could have met withal.


You Will be no Nun, Sister?


Nor you no Countess?


I would be as willingly enclosed in the Walls of a Monastery, as in the Arms
of that Count Verole; and in the Arms of Death rather than in either


Well; I Am not so difficult; I had rather be alive upon any Terms, than dead
upon the best; I had rather be a Nun, than be nothing at all; though there is
nothing I had not rather be, than be a Nun


Any Man's Company, rather than the Company of all Women.


It Is more to my Humor, I confess to you, among the rest of my Venial
Offenses; But Valentine! he is your Man, Sister; would I had the fellow of him
--


For your Confessor, Sister?


I could confess something to him that would make him enjoin me another kind of
Penance, than my Prayers


What! Absolve you from your Devotion?


And persuade him to make a Sinner of me, rather than suffer my Father to make
me a Saint, so much before my time


You are a mad Girl: But what of Valentine?


He should not be out of our Design.


I Will answer for him, he will not.


His Interest's so concerned, he should not be wanting in any occasion of
abusing our Father


Or of using the Count as he deserves.


They Are both behind us, Mum --


I have prepared my Daughter to receive the Honor
You intend our House and her, by this Alliance with us;
She too well knows what is owing to a Father and her self,
To my Authority and her own Birth, now to dispute
What I design for her; she has my Will,
The rest I leave to you --

Madam, you hear your Father, and I come
Through his Authority, to speak my Love;
Though bateing his Authority, I must think
There need not many Arguments to move,
More than your knowing me, and what I am.

My Lord, that goes a great way with me, I assure you.


She knows you and your Qualities, my Lord,
And esteem's 'em accordingly: I have heard her say,
She was very much obliged to you, and should be more --

If he would hang himself --


For what, young Lady?


For your kind Care of me.


I Am glad you're sensible I mean you well.


O yes, Sir, sensible! so sensible,
I must be obliged in Conscience to thank you,
For advising my Father to send me to a Nunnery:
The Devil take you for your Advice.

A Nunnery is Virtue's best Retreat from a bad World.


But if my Sisters Fortune, in your Opinion,
Had not wanted mending more than my Manners --

Fie, Charlott, you will tell all.


How could she guess at that?


I might have continued in this bad World,
For any Advice the Count would have given,
In his great care of me to my Father;
But I Will be revenged on him --
Do as much mischief as I can while I am in the World,
And repent when I am out on it, and can do no more.

Bring Sir Antony to my rescue, I beseech thee.


Your Sister's disobliged,
But I Have my ends in serving you --

In serving of your self:
For what I got by her, my Fathers says,
You must command.

To make it but more yours.


So you promise all before you have enclosed us,
But possessed, our Fortunes, and our Persons are your Slaves,
Used like your Slaves, and often both abused.

This is a common Subject for your Sex.
To boast the Glory of your Wit upon;
But I Am above the taste of common things,
Being born above the Rank of common Men.

Out of the Rank, he means, of commen Men; and indeed, he scarcely looks of
Humane Kind


What do I look like then?


There Is nothing like you, you are your self.


I would be nothing else.


What, not of God's Creation?


I am of his Creation.


Of the King's you may be; but he who makes a Count, never made a Man; remember
that, and fall that mighty Crest


It seems you know me then.


By that coy, cock't-up Nose, that hinders you from seeing any Man, that does
not stand upon the Shoulders of his Ancestors, for long Descents of farr-fam'd
Heraldry: I take you for a Thing, they call a Count; for had you not been a
Count, you had been nothing, at least I Am sure you had been nothing here


I would be nothing, if I were no Count.


Pray more respect.


This is the Count Verole.


O, is it so?


That Is to Marry my Cozen.


I have been too bold, pray Ladies join with me --


To laugh at him.


To ask his Pardon.


For the future, know me, and know your self, I ask no more.


Then I am pardoned, for I know my self, and think I know your Worship. Can you
fight


Ha! What do you mean?


Why faith I come but upon a (...) Embassy; and a sinical Phrase that would
fit the fineness of your Quality, would not become my business


What does the Gentleman mean?


Walk but aside with me, I Will tell you what I mean.


You have no Secret for me?


Why then it shall be none.


He will not draw before the Women, sure.


Since the Ladies must be by, as they must be the Judges at last, you must know
then, I come to you from a Gentleman --


Is he no more?


He Is every thing in that, that makes a Man.


You may go, as you came, for me, Sir, if he be but a Gentleman.


His name is Valentine, your Rival in that Lady.


My Rival is my Equal; I am born above his Rank, he cannotrival me.


He does rival you, and will rival you.


Envy he may my Fortune with that Lady.


Well! Envy then, if that must be the Word; he envies you; and only wants an
opportunity of telling you, how much he envies you


A modest Request truly.


He cannot deny it him --


Before his Mistress too.


Now Sir, if you will be so courteous, as by me, who am to be his Second, to
favor him with knowing where, and when he may wait upon you, you will oblige
me by this Civility to serve your Friend, as he designs to serve you


How may that be, pray?


To Cut your Throat, Sir.


O Sir, I Will spare his Compliment.


My Friend's an English Man, and never loses a Mistress for want of fighting
for her, I assure you: Nay, I have known some of my Countrymen, rather than not
make a Quarrel in the Families they made love in, have beat their very Women
into good Nature, and Consent


It should be good Nature for another then.


Such Arguments would not prevail on us.


Unless to Cuckold 'em.


For one reason or another,
There are Cuckolds every where.

How will our Count get rid of this business?


I wait your Answer, Sir.


My Answer is, when I am as angry as your Friend is, which, at present, I have
no reason to be; nor to a day, can certainly say when I shall be --


You must be made angry then.


When I am under a defeat of my hopes about that Lady, as he may be, and, in an
absolute despair of better success, and have nothing else to do with my self, I
may be angry, and then I may fight with him


Must you be angry when you fight?


Or Mad, or Drunk; it is no Employment for a sober Man.


Have you no Notion of Courage?


Notion indeed, young Man; for Courage is no more, than just such a degree of
Heat, to some Complexions natural; but those Men, who want that Heat, may raise
their Spirits to it


I marry! there is a Receipt indeed.


Passion will fire the coldest Elements; the Lees of Wine ferment the dullest
Phlegm to Froth and Vapor; I Have seen a Drunkard in this Fit, attempt dangers
to Rival Caesar: If such Extravagancies make the Brave, Madmen are Heroes


This will not do my business. Will you fight?


It Is common Soldiers work.


You must fight with him.


Not while I can hire Ruffians to take the trouble off my Hands.


You must expect to be used very scurvily, wherever he meets you.


I shall be provided for him.


O, here he comes himself.


If you're for mustring your Friends, I have your Father of my Party.


The Ladies never want an entertainment, when they have Sir Antony to encourage
the Mirth. Pray what particular Diversion has he given you


Very particular indeed.


You were a Party concerned.


And only wanting to make up the Farce.


Yes, this is he, my very, very Fool!


Very handsome Gentlewoman indeed, all three of 'em: and that is Sir Antony, that
the Abbe commended so much


The very same, Sir.


I will be acquainted with him --


Sir Antony. --


Sir you most humble Servant.


Do you know me, Sir?


Not I, but I Am an Englishman, and the English always keep together Abroad,
they say, for fear of being cheated


Of their Money, or Manners?


Of their Mother Tongue.


Of their Mother Church, their Religion. Now I designing to continue, as I am
--


A Fool.


Have a mind to spend my Money among my Countrymen.


You're very welcome --


To be cheated only by your Friends.


There Is Valentine, a very pretty Fellow; but I have known him a great while; I
am for Variety, and fresh Faces: Here Is honest Ilford, my very good Friend, of
half an hours acquaintance, will recommend me


You recommend your self, Sir.


Truly I hear you are an Extraordinary Person, and a Knight, Sir; I am a Knight
my self, Sir


And an extraordinary Person truly: Pray of what Family, Sir?


Of what Family? Of my Father's Family before me; the Family of the Goldings,
of which, I am your Servant, and Sir Gentle Golding


Alas poor Count! I vow I pity him.
Where Is this mad Knight? Oh!
You are before me it seems; but since
I come too late to recommend Sir Gentle to you,
Pray do you recommend him to the Ladies.

This is Sir Gentle Golding --


Sir, as I may say, I may thank you for this favor.


If you are for this sport, I Will find you Game, Sir.


O, of all things Ilove the Women.


Sir Gentle declares that by his Dressing.


You shall not dress in vain, I Will find you employment among 'em.


I Will depend upon you then, and from this time forward, we must be intimate as
Men of the same Brotherhood, and Worship -- ought to be


See, see, our Count has rallied again!


With your Father in his Tail, to sustain him.


We must not stay till they come. At Night I may expect you?


If any thing extraordinary happens --


I Will come express with the Tidings.


You shall hear from us.


Your servant, your servant.


You see, Sir Gentle, we make a shift.


Make Shift! We make a Carnival; all the Year a Carnival: Every Man his Woman,
and a new one at every Town we come at


Ah, would I could say so too!


You say so, Sir Gentle? Fie, fie, you don't desire to say so, to my knowledge.


That Is very fine in faith.


You only rally your Country Men.


Not I, as I hope to be saved, Val, though I love a Joke, I never rally a Friend.


You a Mistress! Why, you have forsworn the Sex!


O Lord, O Lord! that is a likely business indeed! I forswear the Sex! I would
as soon forswear my own Sex, as the Women's; why, I have made it my endeavor,
ever since I was a Man of Estate, to be accounted a Knight of Intrigue; so you
never were more mistaken since you were born, Sir


Why, what a lying World we live in! I was told you were so scurvily used in
England --


Softly, softly, Man.


By Lucia --


A Jilting Jade! You knew her, not worth remembering.


That you were resolved never to venture on the Sex again.


Prithee, dear Val, no more on it: There Is some ill Nature in my part of the
Story; I would not have it go further for my own sake


It goes no further for our hearing it.


We know it already.


Ay, it may be so; I confess, poor Creature, I gave her a Jealousy of another
Woman


And that perhaps, in her Despair of pleasing you much longer, might be a
Reason of doing what she did


Why truly very likely.


And therefore she robbed you.


Of 500 Pounds.


She might have showed a Conscience in her cheating though! Five Hundred Pounds
was too much in reason --


Sir Antony, you are my Friend upon all occasions; but the truth is, I gave her
an Opportunity; left my Cabinet open on purpose; and was glad to get rid of her
for the Money


You shall pay as round a Sum for this Lie, before I part with your Vanity.


And this is all?


The short and long of the story.


Leave the silly Creature to her Garret, where she will be in a little time:
she will hang her self in her Garters when the Money is spent


I warrant her, will she, and be glad to come off so too.


So, forgetting Disasters at home, you travel --


To drive and old Mistress out of his Head.


And recover here, what he had lost in England by the Gallantry of a French
Intrigue --


Which I come qualified for, Gentlemen; being able to bid up to the Price of
any of 'em


If you show your Money, we may borrow.


You may borrow, but I never lend; you are acquainted, and have your good
Breeding and Behavior to recommend you to the Ladies


You show your Wisdom in your good Husbandry, Sir Gentle; you are a Stranger,
and must be obliged to your Pocket for what you must expect from 'em


And therefore, Sir Antony, I will part with my new Acquaintances, my Luidores,
to none but the Ladies


Money does every thing with the Women in France, Sir.


I will not spare it upon them, Sir Antony: I rely upon you for a Mistress then.


You shall see her this Evening.


Bills and Business, Gentlemen; but now we live together, no Ceremony: Adieu
for a moment; and dear Sir Antony, yours


You are in his favor.


And will be in his Pocket: Leave him to me.


Our Abbe and the Pilgrim again! This Visit is to you.


He has a mind to make a Convert of me, that is certain; but whether in the
Flesh or the Spirit, is the question


He Is for the outward Man, I warrant him.


And his Arguments of this World, whatever the Pilgrim's may be.


Ah my little Man! you have lost a mighty Satisfaction; the Pilgrim has wrought
Wonders upon us all within


Much above my Expectation, indeed.


His Story staggers me, I confess; and has cured me of an old Diffidence I had
of all Religious Pretenders


Well, he is a Rogue; and you have not found him.


You are the only Infidel in the Company.


You dissemble a Belief; it is necessary to the Church, and you get by the
Trade; but none of you remove Mountains, that I hear of


Do but hear what he can say.


I Will give him both my Ears --
But not a word here; I must have him to my self,
To discover the bottom of him.

It Is a work of the Spirit indeed; and the Spirit works unseen of Human Eyes;
therefore in private would do very well


Do as I order you.


There is an obstinacy in Sin, that will not be confuted before Company; Reproof
may return into our own Teeth a Rebuke and a Reproach unto our selves. For
which Reason I am assured, that a Privacy in Communication, and a Retirement
from the eyes of the World (when the Cause is Conscientious) are always
necessary to a Conviction, and Conversion of the Wicked


Those Necessaries thou shall have at my Lodging; I follow thee, Pilgrim:
Farewell Gentlemen, if I am convinced in this Point, and live to set foot in
England again, I shall satisfy those Heretical Unbelievers, that I have seen
one Miracle in a Catholic Country


Thus every Man to his own Interest tends;
The Pilgrim makes his Converts, We make Friends,
With the same Conscience all, for our own Ends.

THis is a dry Subject, Pilgrim; there is no engaging in it with out a Bottle.


You Will have your own ways here.


Have you infused the Opiate in his Wine?


I warrant him he sleeps for it; yours is half Water.


If I don't find him a Knave, I Will make him a Fool, for troubling me with his
Impertinence: But chiefly, for the dear Jest of exposing his Reverence to the
Laughter of the Trophane

Have you done there?
Lock the door, and let no body come near us.
Now Pilgrim, we are alone; and sit you down --
Nay, I will have no Blessing upon our Endeavors, but a Bumper -- this will
banish Crosses: Here Is to the falling of the Flesh, and the rising of the
Spirit


It Is a mysterious Health, of sacred sense; even to the pulling down of Satan's
Throne


A little Wine does well to qualify the Water you drink in your Pilgrimage.


Sometimes without offense, Wine may be used; though our whole Life is but a
Pilgrimage --


That Is as you please to make it. Come Sir, this is the Searcher of Hearts;
here is to the opening of ours --


Hearts and Eyes, that we may see our Errors. This Wine will warm him, sure.


Confession is a step to Repentance, you say.


The ready Road --


Then drink off your Glass, Pilgrim: How do you like your Wine?


It Is warm, I promise you --


Able to distinguish a Saint from a Sinner; and will keep you out of the Mire,
better than your wooden Shoes


'Twill rather leave us there. But to our purpose now --


Another Glass to strengthen my Attention; I shall edify the better by it.


Sure he cannot make me drunk.


I expected you would have drunk to my Conversion.


I should have began it in Charity, indeed; but I Will make you what Reparation I
may, and drink a full Glass for my forgetfulness


I warrant him my own.


To your Conversion be it --


This is the way to it, and the pleasantest Road you can travel in: For let me
tell you, the World is bad enough at the best; we need not take Pains to make
it worse


Too many do indeed.


Such foolish Apostles as thou art then: Why, I begin to despair of thee: I
took thee for a sanguine, sensual Sinner, a Man of Sense, and an Hypocrite. But
I find thee a peaking Penitent, and an Ass


You sit in the Seat of the Scorner.


Though you pass upon the Abbe, and other Fools, I expected you would have opened
your self to me: I profess my self, what I thought you were under your Habit, a
Rogue: We might have been of use to one another. But since you are for cheating
no body but your self,


I must not lose this Opportunity.


Now I begin to believe all the silly things you have said of your self; your
being weary of, and leaving the World, when you had a good Share of it your
own; your parting with the Pleasures (which you call the Vanities) of it, at a
time, when you were in a condition of enjoying 'em, by a senseless resigning up
your Birthright


My Service to you.


Of a considerable Quality and Fortune to a Younger Brother; who indeed needed
no other Expectation for his Wants, than the abundance of your Folly to live
upon


You censure me too rashly.


I speak my Thoughts, and am so far from imitating you any way, that when an
Elder Brother stood between me and a good Estate, I made bold to remove him


By no violent means.


Something before his time. I had a Jointure too encumbered me; but a Physician
after my own Heart eased me, and my good Lady-Grandmother


And dare you own it?


Not at a Bar of Justice.


So horrid a Villainy!


Never troubles me: I don't proclaim it but in my Cups, and where I think I Am
safe to Men of my own Kidney --


You confess your self a Villain?


Any kind of Rogue that serves my turn; for I am of a Principle, that levels
every thing in the way of my Pleasure or Profit


A Worthy Principle!


I cheat the Men, and lie with the Women, as many as I can get in my Power.


Sir, I honor you; pray sit down again.


To hear you preach again?


And are you really this Rogue you pretend to be?


Are you the Fool you pretend to be?


I must come nearer you.


How, Jewels!


I bring my Welcome with me.


Enough to set up a Saint: The Lady of Loretto may keep her Chamber; thou have
spoiled her Holy Days, by robbing her Shrine: For thou have robbed hers, or
some other, that is certain


It Is certain I have the Jewels: How I came by 'em, and why I put on this Habit
--


Then you are no Pilgrim?


No more than you are a Priest. I am as errant a Rogue as you can be; a Shifter
of Shapes and Names; have traveled through every Profession, and cheated in
all; so having by my Industry gathered a handsome Fortune, I converted that into
Jewels, and my self into a Pilgrim, for the safer conveyance of both into
Spain, whither I was going till I lit upon you


I saw you through your Weeds, and had a mind to discover you.


Well, now you have discovered me --


Why, now I like you.


But are you sure you like me?


Like you extremely.


If you can like me, you may love me too; for a Woman I know you are.


Am I discovered too --


Nay, I Am resolved to like you in any Sex.
But it is impossible such Beauty should be a Man's:
And I will think you a Woman,
Till you convince me to the contrary.

Have you a Mistress to be convinced to the contrary?


We were made for one another Conversation; here is that shall keep it in
humor


I have heard of Mark Antony's Pearl Cordial.


You shall drink nothing else but Pearl dissolved: Ha! What Is the matter with
me


Now, now my Dose begins -- you grow indifferent --


My Senses vanish all.


What fall a-sleep before me?


By and by I Will come again to you.


So, he is as safe as his Casket in my custody: Governor, you may appear.
Here Is an Oriental Present from the Mogul,
By the hands of his Ambassador there.

He looks as he were drunk-dead, or dead-drunk.


Examine his Pockets, lets see what Credentials he has for his Character, though
you see I have treated him like an Ambassador without 'em


Here are Tablets full of Memorandums, to avoid such and such places where he
has done his Rogueries


Very well; these, when he awakes, will make good, if he should have the
impudence to dispute my Title to the Theft


You will not keep all the Jewels?


A round Ransom may redeem 'em; but him I must expose, Governor; when I send
for him, bring him in a Chair to the Abbe's


Most carefully.


And if Sir Gentle enquire for me, as I expect he will, direct him thither.


I will not fail.


I have a Mistress for him.


Volante is so busy for another, she has nothing to do for her self; so
closely employed for Valantine, she has no Employment for any Body; or when she
has, it is partially designed for that Boy-Knight, in prejudice of every Man
that may with more reason pretend --

Sir Antony -- Sir Antony -- a word with you --


Prithee let me go; I am big with a Jest, and shall certainly miscarry with the
first grave Word you say to me


Be delivered of your Burden then, lay it at my door; I Will Father it for a
Friend


As some Men would a Bastard, for the Reputation of getting it.


I have thought better of this Rivalling business between us; I see plainly
Volante declares for you --


I think the poor Creature loves me indeed.


And it is to no purpose to proceed --


None in the World, Sir.


In the measures I had taken in making my way to her; therefore now I come,
like a Friend, to desire a Favor of you


Now you say something, Ilford.


And like a Friend to advise you; you're a very pretty Fellow, and have a great
many dancing years to trip over, before you come to be setious


I hope so, Sir.


You should Ramble before you Settle --


For fear of rambling after --


You are too great a Good, among the Women, to think of being particular; a
dozen years too gay for the Condition --


Too gay for a Lover.


Too gay for a Husband.


Ay, marry Sir, a Husband!


How Sir?


I make Love sometimes, but do not often Marry.


What do you follow Volante for then?


Cannot you tell for what? For as good a thing you may swear, Ilford: You guess
at her Inclinations, poor Rogue; and a Lady shall never lose her Longing upon
me; I design to Lie with her


Without marrying her?


Without asking any Consent but her own; I am not for many words, when I have a
mind to be doing


So impudent a thing I never heard!


Quarrelling again Gentlemen!


Upon the old Subject.


I hate the Employment and Character of an Informer: But you come so upon the
scandalous minute, I must tell you what; that young Gentleman --


Sir Antony has no Friend of you, Sir.


Nor you of him, Madam; as you will find, when you hear what he says of you.


Pray what is the matter?


He has the Impudence not only to design it, but even to me his Rival, who love
and honor you --


Your Story, Oh, your Story!


He dares notoriously tell me to my Face, That he never designed to marry you;
but because you were in love with him, poor Creature, he would do you the
favor to Lie with you


Madam, you know he hates me upon your Account; and this is one of the poor
Endeavors of his Malice to ruin me: You cannot think I would be such a Villain
--


I will not think it, Sir Antony.


Such an Idiot, if I could have it in my head, to declare it to my Rival.


Oh no -- it is not probable.


By Heaven and Earth he said it.


I would not believe it for Earth and Heaven, if he did.


Nay then it is labor lost.


If you will deliver this Letter to Valentine, you will do him more service, [
Gives Ilford a Letter.] than you have me with your News -- I will not leave you
behind me, Sir Antony


I Am going to the Abbe's, Madam.


Well! I could almost wish, he would lie with her, to convince her, though she
will not believe me, she will him; and that, in time, will be a sufficient Revenge
upon her Folly


The Count has his Gurd du Corpse, Valentine.


Sir Antony has Alarmed him.


He is in a state of War, fit to give Battle already.


What he wants in his Person, he has in his Equipage: But they threaten too
much, to do any Harm


Do you secure your Person; Volante shall secure your Mistress against him, I
warrant her


Here Is a Letter she gave me for you.


Down with your Burden; and place him in that Chair. So, this is as proper a
Scene to recommend our Farce to the Family, as we can have --


Sir Gentle Golding is below, and would speak with you.


One of you bring him up --
Governor, he must not know you belong to me.

I know your Design upon him; and I Will be gone to put things in Order to
receive him --


To receive Valentine: He shall be welcome to me; but to deceive Sir Gentle.


You are as busy (...) a Projector, some of your Plots must miscarry,


Ha! he begins to stir: How long will the Opiate hold him?


If he wakes before the Company comes, you lose your pleasure of laughing at
him


But I have a sudden Though, may give us a better Diversion.


Sir Antony, your most incomparable humble Servant.


Sir Gentle, I Have done your Business.


With the Lady you promised me?


With that very Lady; I Have secured an Appointment for you; but being a Woman of
Quality --


There you oblige me for ever.


Though something decayed, and fallen in her Fortune -- She must be humored in
little things; she will have her Forms


I warrant her; and very fit she should. A Person of Quality is known by her
Forms


They last but till the Evening, then I Will carry you to wait on her. Shows the
Pilgrim.] Here Is a drunken Pilgrim will afford you Merriment enough to
entertain some part of the time


Dead drunk, as I intend to live sober.


Do me the favor to stay; and secure him, if he should wake. I Will but bring
the Abbe and his Family to share in abusing him, and be with you again


Why what an Unlucky, Hypocritical Rogue is this, to be discovered, and to lie
at the mercy of Sir Antony! If he were but half as Holy, as he pretended, he
might 'scape by Miracle; but he sleeps so sound, no Revelation can Wake him


Boy, Draw the Curtain, Sirrah --


Is the Light in your Eyes, Sir? What pains he takes to come to himself! Gad,
I Will play the Rogue with him -- I Will be the Midwife to his Labor -- Stay, let
me see, a stiff Straw would do rarely, to probe his Sobriety. If his Brain be
touched, he will take up the more time in his Cure, and it is well if ever he be
his own Man again. Now for the Experiment


Ha! Am I alive? Where have I been? Where am I now? How came I here? Who are
you? What would you have


Have! My self in a Wish to England. Would I were in my Mothers Belly again.


Speak, I conjure you, speak to me.


He Is as heartily frightened, as I can be; I Will pluck up a Spirit, and speak to
him


Some ill thing has possessed me.


Yes, possessed thou art, by the loud Spirit of powerful Wine possessed. A
drunken Devil


A Bottle, and Sir Antony I remember, and the Discoveries I made him.


You are discovered, and in the Abbe's House --


In the Abbe's House!


Where now your business is to be laughed at, and exposed; and the whole Family
are coming to make your Holiness a Ridiculous Visit to that purpose


That young Rogue Sir Antony! Has he done nothing else to me?


Have you lost your Learning? How could you miss it so soon? A Table Book?


Sir, I am robbed; and I took you very suspiciously about my Pockets; you shall
answer the Robbery


Why, do I look like a Pick-pocket? I Would have you to know, I scorn your Words:
But that Trick shall not serve your turn --


Serve my turn, Sir --


You must not 'scape me so.


Why, Sir, am I your Prisoner? I must not be found here.
I have an Inkhorn may frighten him.

Look you, Sir, here is the Inside of my Pockets; I have nothing about me, but
Bills of Exchange, and this Purse of Elizabeth Broad Gold: You shall search me,
if you please


I have searched you, and found you, and must go by you too --


O Lord Sir, I don't hinder you --


No, no, you had not best.


Pray take it away: I have a natural Aversion to the smell of Gunpowder --

Though 'twill be difficult to get away, for the Servants are ordered to stop you.


How! to stop me!


Now he wont offer to go.


The Servants ordered to stop me, do you say?


If you be the Pilgrim.


Then I Will be the Pilgrim no longer --


What will you be then pray?


Even Sir Gentle Golding; I will get off in your Person, since I cannot in my
own; I must change Outsides with you --


O Lord Sir, there is no Occasion for it: I know nothing of a Design upon you.


That Is more than I know.


Faith and troth now, what I said, was only to play the Rogue with you.


And what I do, is to play the Fool with you. You must strip Sir.


O, but this is carrying the Jest too far.


Look you, you may keep your Worship and Wit for your own wearing; but I must
borrow your Clothes


At any other time, and welcome; I should be pleased with the Humor on it; but
this is my first day of wearing 'em; besides, there is a Mistress in the Case --


As long as you live, prefer a Friend to a Mistress, Sir Gentle; Come Sir, a
little of your Assistance


But I am to see her this Evening; and one would be well dressed you know, the
first time


If you must see your Mistress, Visit her in Masquerade; it is a fashionable way
of beginning an Intrigue -- and a Pilgrims Habit -- is as Fantastical, as you
can contrive -- to give a Lady a Curiosity -- of knowing more of you -- And
that I know is your Business


That is my Business indeed: But if I lose my time --


Don't make a noise, nor follow me; If you would see her, or little England
again, know your Friends, and give thanks Sir --


What a pass have I bought my self to, by my own
Policy! Why must I needs lie my self out of my Clothes?
If I had held my Tongue, or spoke but the Truth,
He would have gone about his Business, without interrupting mine.
Now here I must stay, to be exposed in his Room;
But in a foolisher Figure, than ever the Pilgrim made:
He was only disguised: But I am stripped.
He was drunk indeed; would I were dead Drunk,
To cover my Shame, any way; would I had any Disguise.
I Gad I Will put on the Pilgrim's -- It cannot be worse with me --
Besides, the respect that is paid to this Clothing, will at least
Carry me safe to my Lodging.

Sir, I have accepted these Bills already.


I know you have: But my Occasions falling out more Extraordinary than I
expected, I am forced to press you for this Bill of 100 Pistols, before the Day


I have so often suffered, for those Complemental Payments, that I have
resolved against 'em: But my Correspondent gives me an account of Sir Gentle
Golding; you shall have what Credit you please with me


A hundred Pistols I have present use for.


If my Cashier were at home, you should have 'em along with you; but in the
Morning, as soon as you please --


I Will send my Servant to you -- pray Sir, what news have you in the City?


The newest Sir, is of a Pilgrim, that is suspected of something; I am
Imperfect in the Particulars; but there are Warrants out to apprehend him, that
I know


There Is no believing Outsides; Sir, your Servant.


So I think too; And therefore I will be better Informed, whether you are Sir
Gentle Golding or no, before I leave you


The hundred Pistols, if I had received 'em, had carried me off cleverly, and
for some time, supported my Designs, in another place, till an Opportunity had
favored me in making a handsome Composition with Sir Antony about my Jewels --
However, I make a pretty good Figure still; Here Is a good Suit of Cloats to
begin the World with again --


Bless your Worship, Sir Gentle, long may you live to wear 'em; How do your
Clothes fit you, Sir


Very well Friend, very well.


Have you forgot me, Master?


No, no, I have not forgot thee; for I never saw thee before.


I am poor Courtaut, your Taylor's Finisher; I brought your Honor's Clothes
home to you this Morning --


Did you so, did you so?


By the same token, you said, you would give me something to drink you health;
but you were pleased to forget it


I remember I gave thee nothing indeed; but the next time --


Aye, an't like your Honor, I am contented to stay, if my Master would: But he
has beaten me black and blew for leaving the Clothes behind me, without Money


Gad forgive me; that I should forget that too! But come to my Lodging an Hour
hence --


Please you, I Will wait upon you now to your Lodging --


How shall I shake him off?


For I dare not go home without the Money, or some part on it?


Here, take this Purse, it is more than the Debt, but take the rest for thy
self, now I remember thee --

The Elizabeth broad Gold has delivered me.


Yes, Master Monsieur, that is my Master, Sir Gentle Golding. You shall see me
speak to him --


Young Man, a word with you.


More Debts to pay! I shall fall like an Executor without Assets.


Sir, I have been about your Business, with the Messenger, as you ordered me --


This is one of my English Servants it seems; I Will answer him in French to get
rid of him


If you were at leisure --


Que Demandez vous? que dites vous Laquais?
Entendez vous le Francois, grand Coquen?

How Is this? I durst have sworn it had been my Master; but I am sure he has no
more Languages than Tongues and that his Mother gave him: Besides he is too good
an Englishman, to learn any thing in another Country


Je ne vous en tens pas, je ne parle pas Anglois.


It seems I was mistaken, Sir, this is some outlandish man; he cannot speak
English


How, not speak English!


I Am sure he paid me for the Suit upon his back, but just now, in very good
English --


And would have borrowed a hundred Pistols of me, in as Civil English --


I can speak English Gentlemen, I spoke French, only to try, if that Fellow had
learned any thing, since he came into the Country


I Will have a trial with you. This is some Rogue that has murdered my Master --


And stole his Clothes --


And robbed him of his Bills of Exchange.


Murder, Murder; Roguery, Thievery, stop him.


Nay the Pilgrim was in the right, in getting off before your Evidence came
upon him


I never heard of so Extraordinary a Rogue, as he confesses himself to be in
these Tablets


But that our gentle Knight, should neither hinder him from going, nor be
forthcoming himself, makes me believe some Ridiculous Accident has light upon
him


Let it be but Ridiculous enough, and I may forgive him.


The Ports are shut, and for the Pilgrim, if he be in the City, we shall have
him again


What Is that sneaks by us so?


Our very, very Saint.


Good morrow Pilgrim!


Will Not you know your Friends?


We were too late for your Levy. (...) men of your Austerity and Life never
indulge the Flesh, by sleeping long; you are an early Stirrer


Pray look up: You can do nothing sure to cast you down.


Even the very same.


What do you in this Habit?


It Is whimsical and odd; I had a mind to try if you could know me in this
Disguise


O yes, we know you in any Disguise.


But there is a Warrant out against the Pilgrim; you will be taken up for him.


Why? you don't take me for the Pilgrim.


But the Government will.


The Government then, will take me for as very Rascal as lives unhang'd in it.


But what is become of him?


You were last with him --


You have conveyed him away.


Or murdered him --


You must answer for him, for you have his Clothes.


Nay if it be so, I Will tell you how I came by 'em --


The whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth.


I Will see him hanged, before I tell a lie for a Rogue, that has used me so
scurvily --


How scurvily, dear Knight?


Why, when you left me you know, alone with him, he took his time, when my Back
was turned; and clapped a Pistol to my Breast --


Bless the Mark! a Pistol!


A Pistol, Sir Gentle!


A double Barrel'd Pistol.


A brace of Bullets in each, I warrant you.


I warrant you there were: for he swore he would shoot me through the Head --


The Pistol was at your Breast, Sir Gentle.


Breast, did I say -- Did I say, at my Breast Gentlemen? But Breast or Head Sir
-- He swore he would murder me, if I did not give him my Clothes, to make his
escape in


And so, you gave him your Clothes?


No I thank you; that were to make my self Accessory; I put him to the trouble
of taking 'em


And very wisely done, Sir.


So he stripped you?


To my very Shirt, I Will make Oath on it, before a Magistrate.


You put on his Clothes then, as one may say, in your own defense?


You may say so indeed.


Stick there Sir, Se defendendo will bring you off.


I must have gone home Naked else.


And could you have passed sullenly by us, and concealed such an occasion of
Laughing at you


Prithee Sir Antony, no more on it.


Bring him along: Bring him along --


What Rabble have we here?


We are enough to hang one Rogue, or we deserve to beat Hemp for one another.


Where are you haleing the Gentleman?


Sir Antony, I am in your Power; stand but my Friend in this Business, and
bring me off, you shall make your own Conditions about the Jewels --


I Will swear point blank my Master's Murder upon him.


Who is your Master, Friend*


Sir Gentle Golding, and like you; and I am his Man.


Aye, it is my Man indeed, would I were his Master again.


You my Master, you Rascal! my Master's a Knight --


Now Abbe, I am even with you and your Pilgrim: But since I have brought him so
far into his Business, it is matter of Conscience to bring him out again. I was
provided for his Impertinence; and since I could not make him drunk, I gave him
an Opiate to expose him as if he were; for that purpose I removed him to your
House: But coming to himself before I expected, he escaped that Design --


And finding the Disgrace ready to fall on me, and in your House, I made bold
to change Clothes with Sir Gentle Golding --


It Is true indeed, Gentlemen.


But since Matters are brought to a clearing, I am ready to return 'em to the
Gentleman


As you had 'em, I hope?


Every thing but his Purse; which I was forced to give his Tailor there to get
rid of him


Return the Purse.


I Will see your Master paid.
The hundred Pistols are ready, Sir.

For Sir Gentle Golding, I only hastened you.


Why, how did you know I wanted such a Sum?


It shall be paid to you, or your order.


Pray pay it to no body else.


You Have done your Duty, Gentlemen; it is very well. Pilgrim, a word with you. --


How this fooling has run away with the time!


I Will be for you immediately.


Within a quarter of Ten already!


I should have been glad to have made one, Valentine.


I thank you; but Numbers may discover us, and Sir Antony will not be out of the
business


Do me but this piece of Service, and I will not only pardon you, but reward you
well when you have don't. Besides, it is a kind of Revenge upon Sir Antony


I am at your Mercy, and you shall command me any thing.


Sir Gentle says, you drew a Pistol upon him.


That was not according to the Law of Arms.


I cannot tell how his Fear represented it, but it was an Inkhorn that disarmed
him


You will not fail, when I send for you?


I Will but change Clothes with that Gentleman, and be ready as soon as you
please


Now Valentine have with you --


It Is near upon your appointment with my Niece: I Will secure her Father within,
the better to favor her running away from him


I wish you well, Gentlemen.


To morrow; let but once to morrow come,
And she is mine; Married, and wholly mine:
If then not wholly mine, 'twill be my Fault.
Gentlemen, we must be every where to Night:
This Englishman, that dares to Rival me,
May attempt farther; if he should, I think
Floriante but too inclined to pardon him.
But we'll prevent the worst.
Stand and observe their Motions.
Nay, then it is he; be sure you
Murder him.

Villains and Murderers, I hope you are not hurt.


Thank your Assistance, Sir.


If I am not a Man in this point, I Will never wear Breeches more.


I know 'twas Count Verole.


He has not raised himself in my Esteem by this base Action --


What do you out of doors?

I could not stay within, knowing your Danger.


It Is over, now retire.


Pray pardon me; if I have done any undecent thing, my Duty caused it in my
Fears for you


I Am sorry I have alarmed your Family.


I dare swear for him he is


So far it is well, Sir: If you think your self obliged for what is past, show
it in what is to come; forbear my House, my Daughter is disposed of: So
goodnight


Very good Advice, Valentine: Since you cannot make it a good Night with his
Daughter, make it as good as you can with some body else


Why Faith, the Expectation of her has raised me into a desire of any thing in
Petticoats


What think you of my English Lady?


You owe me a Favor there, Sir Antony.


To Night I Will pay it then; I have an Appointment upon me now; but not being in
so perfect a Condition to oblige her, you shall make an End of my Quarrel


With all my Heart.


I Will send my Governor to conduct you.


He, like other wise men, makes no scruple of Pimping, when he gets by the
Employment


Then you are not one of those fine Gentlemen, who because they are in love
with one Woman, can lie with no body else


Not I, Faith Knight; I may be a Lover, but I must be a Man.


When the dear days of Rambling Joys are over,
When Nature grudges to supply your Whore,
There Is Love enough for Marriage left in store.

SIR Antony not being able to wait upon you in Person, as designed, has desired
me his Friend --


Sir, your most humble Servant.


To show you the way.


I Will show my good Breeding, and follow you.


The Lady is at present in private; when she has dispatched her own Business,
she will be ready for yours


Then she is a Woman of Business.


And of Dispatch too, Sir: If you love Pictures, there is a Gallery will take up
your Thoughts till the Lady's at leisure to employ 'em better. I Will let her
know you're here


How Ceremony disguises any thing! I cannot take this civil Gentleman for a
Pimp, though I have Occasion for him; nor this House for a Bawdyhouse, though I
have a mind to make it one. Would Sir Antony were here, to encourage me with
his Impudence: When I have Company to halloo me, I can fasten like a Bull-Dog.
But I have a villainous Suspicion, that when I see this Lady, I shall take her
for a civil Gentlewoman; a buse her, away, she does not deserve; think too well
of her, and loose my labor


Faith Madam, your Entertainment will keep you in Countenance; you may own the
making of it


You Will trust your Stomach with a covered Dish another time, Sir?


You may show your Face after it, and expect the Thanks of the Company.


And disgrace the Reputation I have got with you in other things.


Nay, if you think so, I would not have you show it for the World.


That were to ruin the Complement you intend me.


But after all, if your Face should be as delicate as your other Charms --


But if it should not be as delicate --


Then keep it to your self; but it is pity it is not: but be it what it is, I
will pay some part of my Thanks in advising you


You would say Grace and be gone, my serious Sinner, would you?


Only to make sure of coming again Child, that is all.


Some of that all, I beseech you --


My Doctrine will turn to thy use. Child, and lead me often to thee, if thou
have but the Grace to make the right Application


Good Holder-forth, bate your damned Faces, and begin.


Why then, in the first place, about our Friend Sir Antony; He Is a very pretty
Fellow I grant you; but he is a Boy, a giddy-pated Boy --


A little too young indeed to be trusted --


In an Affair of this nature, by any Woman that has a Reputation to secure with
her Pleasure


I have been afraid of his talking indeed a great-while.


You must expect it, Madam; he has not Experience enough to value you: All
Women are alike to the young Fellows; as indeed all Fellows are alike to the
young Women; neither Sex chooses well, till they come to an Age of Discretion


There I am with you indeed.


There is a maturity required in Love, as in other Fruits, to recommend the
true relish of it, to the distinguishing Palate of an Epicure. I am something a
better Judge of that pleasure, than he can be: And I think fitter, a great
deal, for an Intrigue with your Ladyship, both in discretion and performance --


Then Sir Antony can be.


Sir Antony in Petticoats.


But are not you a Rogue, Valentine? Not to receive a Courtesy from a Lady by
the favor of your Friend, but you must abuse your Trust, and supplant the very
Interest that raised you to her


I am confounded indeed! But are you Sir Antony Love?


All but my Petticoats.


And are you sure you're a Woman?


Are not you sure of that, Sir?


I am; and charmed with the certainty --
Now every pleasure past, comes over my thoughts:
How many opportunities have I lost,
That you have given me, and must answer for!

There are as many to come; you shall command 'em all.


Now I remember; you fathered a Bastard for me, at Paris --


I had the reputation of it indeed; and should have had the Cow with the Calf;
for her Father pursued me to marry her, through all means of Accommodation, into
the strait at last of confessing my Sex to the English Ambassador --


This you never told me before.


He had her punished, and secured me in his Family, as long as I staid there;
for you know, he was a Man of Honor --


And a Man of Gallantry too, Madam, that knew which way to improve such a piece
of good Fortune --


As well as any body; and so he did Valentine: By his generosity and good
usage, he pressed me so very far, that not being able to answer the Obligations
I had to him, (having you in my head at that very time) I was forced to run
away from him, to get rid of him


How could you keep this from me so long?


Now it is more welcome to you?


Had I known it before, it had been in my power --


Not to marry me, I hope, Valentine! But if you could be in that mind (which I
neither desire, nor deserve) I know you too well, to think of securing you that
way


But I would not have engaged my self, any where else --


I know your engagements to Floriante; and you shall marry her. That will
disengage you, I warrant you


You continue your Opinion of Marriage.


Floriante, I grant you, would be a dangerous Rival in a Mistress --


Nothing can Rival thee.


And you might linger out, a long liking of her, to my uneasiness, and your
own; but Matrimony, that is her security, is mine: I cannot apprehend her in a
Wife


Well Governor, what think you of my Management?


Why, if you take but half the pains in your Profit, that you have spent in
your Pleasure, I think we may expect a very good account of the Knight --


Sir Gentle Golding! he is in your Debt indeed: I had not leisure to remember
him


We'll laugh at him at leisure.


He Is in the Gallery, expecting your pleasure.


My pleasure is to see him, bring him in.

I promised him a Mistress, you must know: 'Twill be foolish enough to observe
him, when he discovers me; pray stay, and laugh with me


The Interview must needs be ridiculous.


My Office ends, where the Lady begins; I Will leave you to her.


Pray, Sir, a word with you --


The sewer the better, till you have saluted her: You see she expects it.


I should have saluted her indeed: but the surprise of your Beauty, Madam, made
me forget my Complement


My Face has surpised him, I believe.


Pray, did I never see this Gentlewoman before?


You best can tell that, Sir; but you are concerned at something.


A little concerned, I am indeed, but it is only to know, whether I know her, or
no


In your Tour of France, you may have seen her; she is of the Country.


A French Woman.


Of Languedock.


I durst have sworn she was an English Woman!


Born and bred among us.


I Am glad on it, with all my heart. For I knew a little Woman, but a great
Devil, so like her in England --


Very like, Sir.


That faith and troth, I was downright confounded at the sight of her.


Some Mistress, that you have forsaken --


O fie, Sir, I never do those things --


I warrant you, and the guilt of her ill usage haunts you up and down, in her
shape


Nay, I deserve it indeed; if it should be so; for I was too barbarous to the
poor Devil, considering I was the first that undid her


See, Sir, the Lady would have you sit down by her; I never saw her make such
Advances before; you are very much in favor


Soft and fair. I must be more in your favor, before I have done with you.


She does not speak English. But there is an universal Character in Love, which
every Creature can comprehend; when she has you alone, she will grope out your
meaning, I warrant you


So, since we have nothing to say to one another, we shall lose no time in
Complements; I like her exceedingly: though I never look upon her, but Lucia
comes in my thoughts; she is so very like that jilting Jade, I shall never love
her heartily: A week will be the farthest, I shall be constant to her. What
sign shall I make, to put her in mind of her Bedchamber? Money speaks all
Languages, this Purse will be my Interpreter

Voulez vous, Do me the grand Favor --

But how shall we do to understand one another? You speak no French, and I
speak no English; It Is impossible to understand one another


Madam; you do speak English --


I understand it a little; enough to know I resemble one. What did you call
her, Lucia, aye, Lucia, a jilting Jade; you don't like that, for that reason
you cannot love me heartily; nor be constant above a Week: I understand so much,
without speaking English; as you find to be understood


I find I do understand you.


But I Will try to speak plainer to you.


Nay, you speak plain enough, Mrs. Lucy. Would I were any where, to be rid of
you


You see, we were not to part so. Fortune will have me obliged to you: I have
almost spent the 500 l. I borrowed of you


I Am glad I had it for you, Madam.


And faith, it is very kind, in an old Acquaintance, to follow me into France,
to supply me again: I know you came a purpose --


Not quite a purpose. --


No, not quite a purpose, some little Business by the by of your own, you might
have, I grant you: But this Purse you never designed for me


I Will force nothing upon you Madam; you may give it me again, if you don't like
it


Yes, yes; the Purse is an amiable Purse, and very well to be liked; only the
Sum does not amount to my Occasions: There Is no retreating, Sir Gentle, you are
in my Power, and without a Ransom, must continue my Prisoner; you know I never
want a Pistol upon these occasions; it is not the first time I have robbed you


Any Composition; but don't murder me; you know I hate a Pistol.


What have you in your Pockets? Nothing but Papers?


You have got already, all the Money I had about me.


About you! with a pox to you: must I be so answered? And why had not you more
about you? Stay, here is a Bill of 100 Pistols, at present, shall excuse you --


It Is very well it does.


Payable to you, or your Order? What Is there?


Run, and receive this Bill for the Gentleman.

He should Indorse it first.


Come, Sir, you must lend me your Order.


No borrowing among Friends; I Will give it you, to Monsieur Traffic.


Why, that is well said.


You live as it were by your Wits; it is better I should loose a little Money,
then you should forget your Trade, for want of employment


A great deal better, Sir Gentle! But I must lock you up till the Money be paid.


Aye, aye, with all my heart; but he will not scruple the payment.


The next time I do you this savor, take care to be better provided; don't let
me lose my labor upon you, I speak as a Friend to you


I Will take your Advice.


If I were not just upon my leaving the Town, and in a very great haste, I can
tell you, you should not get off so easily


I am beholding to you: But I am sorry we loose you so soon.


You may find me again, if Christendom stands were it does a Twelvemonth to an
end; let not that trouble you


Thus all things are provided for by Fate:
The witty Man enjoys the Fool's Estate.
So Rich and Poor, let 'em compute their Gains;
One has his lot in Lands, and one in Brains.
And it is but Justice Fortune should do more
For him, who being born so, would be poor.

I allow all you say: And last Night's Action has not declined the Count from
my Esteem, more than it raises Valentine


He Will keep your Daughter more orderly then a Nunnery can: even let him marry
her


You know, I Am out of my own Power and Choice.


Hang your Choice; you may be ashamed on it.


Indeed I do repent it; but my word and reputation are engaged to him.


Is that a man to make a Grandfather?


No other shall, by Floriante, make me one: And therefore she shall be
Religious, and take the Habit in her Sister's room --


What, make a Nun of her, against her Will!


To cut off all Pretenders; but to prove how I regard your Friend, Charlot you
know, inferior in nothing but her Years, if Valantine likes her, she has my
leave, and shall receive his Visits at the Grate: Let him but conquer her, he
has gained me


Let him get Floriante, and he conquers thee.


Ah my little Palmer! You lie as close as a man in a Proclamation; but you are
a Pilgrim of Honor, I find --

Where I am engaged, Sir --


Sir Antony can never discover thee.


I warrant I do your business --


And your own business --


My own business to be sure, and Sir Antony's too, or I shall loose my Labor.


About it, about it instantly, and prosper, my little Palmer.


Valentine! I have some News for you:


But you amaze me, Sir Gentle --


It would amaze one indeed, Sir Antony.


It Is the oddest piece of Roguery and Impudence that I have heard of.


Aye, so it is, it is pretty odd, and impudent indeed.


A cheating Gypsy; I warrant she has had her eye upon you, from your first
coming to Town


Nay, not unlikely.


I began to suspect her my self, she pressed me so often to bring you.


Ah; if I had known that, Sir Antony!


Why, what if you had?


Why, I would have staid away; but if you had been with me, it had been the
better for me


Much at one for that, I believe. But is she gone out of Town, do you say? You
should have apprehended her --


Pugh, pugh -- she is gone from her Lodging, she must not stay long in a place.


It Is very well she is gone --


Aye, so it is: and I hope I shall never see her again.


I dare swear for him, he speaks his heart.


Well Sir -- your business with me? If it be grave or wise, keep it for your
own use; I never approve discretion in any man, but a Pimp

Sir, you may say what you please, or call me what you please --


Nay Sir, I honor you, if you are one.


Then I am one, and one employed to you.


Begin your Employment, that I may go about mine.


Why then, Sir, in few words; there is a Lady dying for you --


I never visit the Sick, let her die in peace: But don't let a Priest come near
her; he will ask her bawdy Questions, when she has a mind to be serious


She Is only dying for you, Sir.


Were she living for me, I could say something to her; if she make a Will, as
far as the Legacy goes, I may remember her


Your Mirth becomes you, Sir; but the Lady's in very good health, and, in
short, only dying in love with you


Short and sweet.


And has a mind --


I know her mind; and what she has a mind to.


You know the World enough, Sir; to excuse a Lady in Love --


And absolve her too.


Though she should have a Husband --


For making him a Cuckold --


Not to make a practice of it.


The oftener the better.


Nay indeed; there is a great deal to be said for the poor Women;
How can they help or avoid their Inclinations?
Men are too blame, who like young Conjurers, prove
(Safe in the Circle of a Wedding-Ring)
The Magic Spell of Wedlock upon Love:
So, Cuckolds make themselves by marrying.

Very Casuistically brought about, Sir. And I am so much of your Opinion, that
I think the Lady cannot do her self a better justice, nor me a greater favor,
than allow me to wait upon her on such an occasion


That she does in this Billet: And if you think it worth your while to visit
her -- will do you richer, and greater favors


I am at present engaged -- But in the Evening --


The Evening would do well: I am bad to say, her Husband's out of Town, the
rest, her Note will best inform you in


Then this shall be my Guide.


I may cheat you out of your Cunning, before I have done with you.


Why, what the Devil am I engaging in again! I shall draw all the Women in Town
upon me, at this rate: Maids, Wives, and Widows, have one Curiosity or another
always to be satisfied. I have a Reputation among 'em; and if I don't keep it
up, by answering their Expectations -- I shall fail of mine, in my Frollicks,
and be discovered; and that I have no mind to be yet a while! But how the Devil
shall I answer their Expectations -- Or this Lady's in particular, who has
bespoke me for her Evening Service? If I go, I shall disappoint her more than
if I stay away; and I know, good Soul, she would be as much concerned for me,
to find me no Man, as at another time she would be for her self, to be found no
Maid, if she had a mind to be thought one. O here comes Valentine


I would as soon be a Lawyer as a Lover at this rate. Following a Mistress to
no purpose, is as bad as trudging a Foot to Westminster for no Fee. Can you
corrupt a Nunnery for me, my little Knight


I will do any thing for you -- but first you must lend me your Limbs, to carry
on a Design --


Do what you please with me.


Thou art a most incomparable Fellow, Palmer; the Prince of Pimps and Pilgrims!
But what! Sir Antony is a young smoaky Rogue I warrant you, he suspected
something --


Not a bit of suspicion.


He might scruple it at first, you know.


First nor last, he made no scruple at all! But came into my Net, as fast as I
could spread it for him


But came into my Net, as fast as I could spread it for him! Prettily expressed
upon the occasion! And I shall love a Setting-dog, as long as I live, for the
sake of the Simile


I Am glad it pleases you.


Pleases me! Yes, yes; it pleases me! every thing pleases me. But ha! my Boy!
he must not get from us, now we have him in the Net


It Is our fault, if he does.


Why Sir Antony has used thee but scurvily --


To my Cost.


And Revenge is very natural --


And very sweet.


Revenge is sweet indeed; it must be sweet; a sweet Revenge, upon so sweet a
Boy: And take my Word; I Will do you that Justice upon him: For I Will tell you,
what I intend to do with him --


Aye, pray Sir.


Why in the first place I intend -- not to open my Lips, upon that Subject. But
I mean --


I hope so, Sir.


If I can compass my design, I mean --


What do you mean?


Not to explain my self, Palmer -- Ah Rogue! But you know what I mean.


Why to tell you the truth, Ilford, there is a Woman in the case; I expect her
every minute


I fancied some such thing.


She is a thing to be fancied; and you would think so, if you saw her.


Do I know her, Sir Antony?


You have seen her.


What nothing more of her?


None of your peevish Questions.


It Is not Volante?


If it were, you don't come to quarrel for her?


Not I faith, Knight: I come in absolute good Nature to visit you.


Why indeed, I could not expect the favor at your hands, as Matters stand
between us


Nothing shall stand between us: Nothing did, but a Woman; and I come to strike
up a Friendship, offensive and defensive with you, by making a very fair offer
to dispose of her


If you mean Volante, she will dispose of her self.


I know she would dispose of herself to you: But you will not marry her, Sir
Antony: Now I am one of those foolish Fellows, who don't apprehend a Danger,
till they are in it. I never think of being a Cuckold: I love Volante, and would
marry her -- Come, come, there are Women enough for the ill-natured purpose of
your Love; quit her to me, do a generous thing to a Woman that loves you; and
to a Man, who would engage you for a Friend


Why Faith, Ilford, I would do a great deal for you; but I must do something
for her


Do me a Favor, and don't undo her Fame.


But there is the pleasure on it --


To ruin the Woman that loves you --


Not so much out of ill Nature to her, as good Nature my self: Reputation must
be had: And we young Men generally raise ours out of the Ruin of the Women's


But Volante is a Woman of Quality, And has Relations to do her Right, if you
don't do her Reason


Would she had a Brother, to make a business on it: He could not do her so much
right, in fighting for her, as he would do me reason, in making it the talk of
the Town


That would set it about indeed.


If I should say, I had lay'n with her; or endeavor to set it afoot, 'twould
fall of it self


As an impotent Piece of Vanity, or Folly in a young Man.


But no body dares make a doubt of a Report, when a Relation has taken an
honorable Care, by a Duel, to fix the Scandal in the Family


Why, truly I think the Men of Honor are out in that business: Scandal does
not fall into the hands of a Surgeon, like the Wounds of the Body for a Cure:
Opening and Probing, makes the Malady but more inveterate, and the least Air
taints it to a Mortification


It heals best of it self, without a Plaster.


And Time must finish the work. I have observed some Women live themselves into
a second Reputation --


And other Women, who by a natural Negligence, never setting up for any, from
the freedom of their behavior, have passed uncensur'd in those public Places,
and Pleasures, which would have undone Ladies of a sprucer Conversation, but to
have appeared in


So that it is not what they do, but not doing all of a Piece, that ruins their
Character, and unders the Women --


And condemns the Men too: For it is not any Man's Opinion, but his shifting it
to the Occasion, that makes him a Rascal; as let his Opinion be what it will,
if he continues the same, and acts upon a Principle, he may be an honest Man:
But it is no Character I would advise a Friend to


But this is from my business, Sir Antony! And, all things considered, the
difficulties of getting, and the danger of enjoying Volante; in my Opinion, her
Woman would be the better Intrigue


Why indeed the Woman would often be the better Intrigue, were she as difficult
to be compassed as her Lady


It seems the danger doubles your delight.


And we naturally covet, what we are forbid; for very often it is the bare
pleasure of breaking the Commandment, that makes another Man's Wife more
desirable than his own


As at present, the bare pleasure of opposing my Interest, has carried on yours
with Volante, farther then otherwise you designed


Why faith, there is something in that too, Ilsord: Not but I have a very good
Opinion of the Lady


Well Sir Antony, I wish you would think it worth your while, to make a Friend
of me --


I would make a Friend of you.


Resign your Title then: it is but giving me now, what in a little time you will
decline of your self: Make Volante mine, and make me yours


I would with all my heart; if I could do it with Honor.


I warrant you with Honor.


But how can I disengage my self? Matters are gone a great way between us --
she is coming up to me. [Waitwell, whispers and goes out.] Step into that
Closet, you will over-hear what we say; I will not promise I can do you any
service with her. But I Will do you all the good I can; that you may be sure of,
and depend upon


At least, seeing her here, will do some good upon me


O Madam, you as are good as your word.


I can keep it, you see, at your cost, when I like the occasion.


We men are not more punctual to an appointment, upon the hopes of a new
Mistress, then you Women are, upon the first promise of a Husband


And it stands us upon to be diligent in both Sexes. For neither the Men, nor
the Women, continue long in the mind of allowing those Favors


Why faith, Child, the best Excuse for foolish things -- (As Marriage you allow
to be one --


A convenient foolish thing.)


Is the doing 'em without thinking. But, what Madam, cannot a Man sport off a
little innocent Gallantry with a Lady, without being serious a 'both sides; You
are in earnest, I see


Why there is the Jest.


And keep me to my word.


On my word will I


You take all Advantages.


I may be allowed to take what Advantage I can ill the beginning; I shall be
sure to be the looser in the end


In all Plays, one side must be the looser; but Marriage is the only Game,
where no body can be the winner


That Is making an ill Bett indeed, where we may loose, and cannot win; Yet I am
resolved to venture


But Child, have thou no more mercy upon my Youth, my Dress, my Wit, and good
Humor, then to make a Husband of me


Since you could not have me on your own Terms, I know you will take me on mine.


Well, there is nothing but cheating in Love: Very often indeed we are
beforehand with the Women; but when we marry 'em, I Am sure they cheat us


And when do I cheat you, Sir Antony?


Have a care of cheating your self, Madam?


Nay, one time or other, all Women are to be fooled; and I had rather you
should have the profit of me, then any Body else


And pleasure too, I beseech you. I am now going with Valentine to the Nunnery,
to see his new Mistress Charlot --


And by her Interest, to see his old Mistress, Floriante; I know the story, and
what the Abbe designs in it


I shall be back in an hour; by that time the Evening will conceal you the
better: If then you are brave enough --


To meet you, with a Priest for a Second.


I Will have a Father ready to bless our endeavors.


Let him be by to see you play me fair,
And do your worst or best, and never spare.

I warrant you, the first Night for an Heir.


O Sir, your Servant; I see I am beholden to you.


The most in the World I gad, when you know all.


Know all! I know enough to convince me, that you are not capable of a serious
design of serving your Honor, or your Friend --


What Is the matter now, man?


And I was a Coxcomb for thinking you could.


Nay, you may be a Coxcomb however.


What Is that you say?


No quarrelling I beseech you, till you have Cause.


Till I have Cause; I think you have given me sufficient Cause --


To thank me, I have; if you know how to be greateful.


O, I must needs be greateful; and always confess the Obligation you have laid
upon me, in promoting my Interest so visibly with Volante --


So opposite to my own with her.


With so much Diligence and good Nature --


Well remembered, I gad.


That in my hearing, and still to advance my Interest -- you have made an
Appointment to marry her --


And put you to bed to her.


How, how, Sir Antony?


I knew there was no other way to do you a Service with her; therefore I
resolved to marry her for you, and put you to bed to her, for me


Incomparable design!


A poor project of mine, Sir; if you had engaged in it, it might have turned to
account; but as it is, I go as I did


But take me along with you.


I never impose a Courtesy upon any Man; nor quarrel, because he is not
sensible I am his Friend; when you come to your self, you may repent --


I do repent, and confess my self --


Well; what do you confess your self to be?


A Fool, an Ass, to pretend to vie with you in any thing.


And will you always keep in this humble Opinion of your self, and allow me the
Ascendant


I shall be an Ass if I don't.


But you must confess your self a Coxcomb --


Aye, any thing.


For pretending to censure, before you understood my design.


You told me I was a Coxcumb before; and now I begin to believe it my self.


Well, upon your Penitence, I pardon, and take you into favor again.


And into the design.


That you must be: And to convince you that what I do is perfectly in your
Interest, you shall marry us your self --


With all my heart.


I have a Habit for you.
Thus in the World Men keep a pother,
And marry Wives for one another:
And most, like me, in Frolicks woo,
And, to their shame, as little do;
But married Women know the Sense,
And Rights of due Benevolence:
I but provide for mine, what she would soon;
For first, or last, that Duty must be done.

NOw you have done the Office of a Father to the Lady, you may do the Office of
a Friend to me, and go to bed to her. I can do no more than give you an
Opportunity; but if you don't employ it to her advantage, she will never rely
upon you, to improve another to your own


I never deserve another, if I don't make use of this.


There Is no Ceremony to make the Bride coy, in going to bed; she came in an
Undress, as loose as her Wishes; and being under the impediment of but two
Pins, I warrant she is in Expectation already


She shant expect long.


There she is; kiss my Wife and welcome. She will not cry out, for her own sake,
till it is too late to discover it for mine


If she should, I think the Castle's our own.


I leave you to your Fortune; I am going to seek mine in another Adventure.


You have made my Fortune here.


Methinks my Knight begins to show himself already, in a Husbands Indifference;
making we wait so long alone, in a place, where nothing but his Company can
entertain me: But I have heard indeed, that she who marries a Man for his
conversation or good humor, takes care only to secure the least, or the worst
part of it to her self: So this is but a small fault in Matrimony; and ten to
one, before the Year comes about, I may have a more reasonable cause of
repenting. I think I hear him? O Sir, are you come

Sooner than you expected, I believe.


How! Ilford --


I see you are surpised to see me here; and indeed the Occasion, that brings
me to you, is very surprising


What can you mean by this?


You have stolen a Wedding, Madam, though you think to make it a secret; you
cannot expect that Sir Antony should bring his Vanity so low, not to make a
Boast of the Favor he has done you


By sending you to me?


To wish you Joy.


A very likely story.


And give you Joy, Madam.


Would Sir Antony would come, to thank you for your Complement.


He sent me with the Complement --


He send you!


To supply his place to Night. Your Husband wo'not come.


Not come to me?


Be satisfied so far, you are abused; and to convince you, though too late, how
unreasonably you have have preferred that Creature to every Body, he has done
what no body else could have done to you


What has he done?


Given me a fuller Revenge upon your Folly and Scorn, than I could have
conceived for my self --


What has he done to me?


He has married and undone you, left you --


Left me!


The first Night left you; left you to me: Not that I believe he designed me a
favor, more than he would have done any Man else; but you had used me so very
ill, he imagined, I was capable of any malicious Design of exposing you


Of exposing me!


But that you need not apprehend from me.


I Am in your power; but pity me. My Folly, and my Fortune are too plain.


Do you perceive it now?


I should have seen it sooner.


It Is well you find it now. However you deserve of me; I come to serve you: And
since this opportunity (that favors, and was given me for baser ends)
encourages me to nothing, beyond the hope of your esteem, you must give me
leave to think, that, from my behavior, I deserve that Honor better than my
trifling Rival does the Title of your Love


You deserve every thing.


I say enough to warn you of him; but you would venture.


My shame confounds me!


You would not credit me.


I can but wish I had.


Were it to do again, you would follow your Inclination, and do the same thing?


I hate the Villain.


In your Anger?


No, to death I hate him: And were I free from him --


You would not marry him!


Never.


Then you are free from him.


How! free from him!


Not married to him.


Would you could prove it too.


I Will make it plain, if you will consent to it --


More willingly, than I did e're consent. Make that but plain to me; and what
returns are in the poor power of one so lost --


So saved, I hope.


You shall command.


I may restore you to your liberty; but never can my self.


This is the time, and place of appointment; what 'twill come to, Valentine, I
cannot tell


It Is a whimsical Undertaking methinks, to support another Woman's Intrigue, at
your Expense --


There Is no buying such a Frolic to dear.


And part with your Lover to oblige her!


So long, I cannot part with you; to provide for your pleasure as well as my
own: Besides, it is a diverting piece of Roguery; and will be a Jest as long as
we know one another


Who Is there? Sir Antony!


The same; I am aforehand with you.


The Lady, Sir, will thank you. Whom have you with you there?


Only a Servant.


You Will have no need of him; I come to serve you: Besides he may be seen.


I Will send him away.


I Will but step in, to make your way to the Lady, and will wait upon you again.


By this Fellow's advising to send away your Servant, I fancy he may be a Rogue.


If he be a Rogue, I am reslv'd to discover the bottom of him; but if there be
a Woman in the case, I Will leave you to the Employment --


Sir.


Here.


Are you alone?


I am.


Follow me.


Follow me.


Your Pimp proceeds with Caution. But these dark Deeds may require our dark
Lanthorn


Give it me; I can manage this; you must manage the Lady, and for once, not to
make a Custom of it, I Will hold a Candle to you


Where are you, Sir Antony?


Here.


I Am glad you are, and here I Will keep you --


Ha!


Have you forgot your Friend the Pilgrim? I am that Lady in love with you; and
now I have you to my self, I must come nearer to you


The Devil you must --


Are you my Friend the Pilgrim, do you say?


Then I am lost again.


Why how came I to forget you so soon? and are you the Lady that was in love
with me


Rise; and tell all you know of this business, or it shall be the last you
shall ever engage in; I know enough of you to send you to the Galleys


Why indeed Gentlemen, I will not stand Trial with you; I confess some design of
my own upon Sir Antony; but your very good Friend, the Abbe, first set it on
foot, by employing, and paying me well, to decoy you into his power: Now, Sir,
knowing your Character, I thought nothing would sooner spirit you any where,
than the hopes of a new Woman


You see I am true to my Assignation.


But where is the Abbe all this while.


He Is in the House, expecting the good hour.


How shall we do with him?


To make my Peace with you, I Will contribute to any Design against him.


That must be your way.


Go then; and to keep up the Jest, say nothing of what is past, but bring him
to me --


What do you design now?


To continue the Scene with him. For having, as I told you, disposed of his
Niece Volante to our Friend Ilsord, I suppose they may have occasion by to
morrow, for his approbation of what they are doing to night


That Is well thought on; his Consent will come the easier, for our having a
Hank upon him


Get you gone then, like an Evidence, behind the Hangings.


Have I caught you, my little Mercury! have I caught you!


You're very nimble, Sir.


Aye, aye; I have it in my head.


And in your heels too.


Upon occasion -- Ah my little Man! I Am young again; when I like my Company.


But who could expect to see you here?


Why any body would have expected it: How could you expect otherwise? How could
you think, I could stay from you so long? What, you expected a Woman


I did indeed.


Let the Women expect you, there is a plentiful Crop of Maidenheads; if the War
continues to carry off the Whore-masters, some of 'em must fall of themselves,
without gathering; there will scarce be Reapers enough for that Harvest


There Is no Female-Famine, in this Year's Almanac; no fear of wanting Women.


No, no; no fear of wanting Women: But a good natured, old merry Fellow, as I
may be, who can tittle tattle, and gossip in their Families, upon an ancient
Privilege with the Mothers, may do any thing with the Daughters: Such a Man is
a Jewel, to bring you together


Such a Man would be a Jewel indeed.


I know, you little Rogue, your business is to be wicked: I love to be wicked
my self too sometimes, as often as I can decently bring it about, without
scandal: And I will be as wicked -- As wicked as I can be, for you, and with
you


You can do no more than you can do, good old Gentleman.


Old Gentleman! I will not be an old Gentleman; I Am never older than the Company I
am in: What, Five and fifty does not make an old Man; it is want of Appetite,
Infirmity, and Decay, not Five and fifty, that makes a Man old: Five and fifty
has it is Pleasures --


As good have none, Abbe; they are faint and feeble.


Delicate and dainty, my Dear; palatable and pleasant, and thou art mine.


How shall I know that, Sir?


Why thou shall know, all in good time, Child; but an old Fellow, you say!
[Unbuttons, and throws down his Cloak.] What shall I do now, to convince you,
that I am not an old Fellow? Let me see; what shall I do for you


What can you do for me!


What can I do for you?


To prove you are not an old Fellow.


What can I? -- Why I can -- I can part with my Money to thee.


That Is one Argument indeed.


Besides I can -- I will not tell you what I can: But if you will step into the next
Room with me, I have a Collation for you, and a -- There you shall find, what I
can do for you


If I should retire with you, you will be disappointed --


No, no, don't talk of disappointment; I hate to be disappointed. -- We Are very
luckily alone, and should make a good use of our time; no body will come to
disturb us


But I may disappoint you my self --


You will exceedingly; if you don't go a long with me: Delays are dangerous,
when Opportunities are scarce; and we elderly Fellows have 'em but seldom -- I
vow I Will teize you, and kiss you into good humor; I swear I will; if you will not
go


But it is not in my power to oblige you.


I Will put it into your power, I warrant you.


But that I doubt, Sir. For very unhappily for your purpose; I am a -- Woman.


Ha! how, a Woman!


A Woman!


What the Devil have I been doing all this while? A Woman! Are you sure you're
a Woman


How shall I convince you?


Nay, nay; I am easily convinced; the very Name has convinced me.


But if you have a mind to be satisfied --


I thank you Madam, I am satisfied, more than I desire to be satisfied; and as
much satisfied as I can be, with a Woman


I told you I should disappoint you. --


You did indeed; and you have kept your word with me, you have disappointed me,
plaguely disappointed me. But I beg your pardon, Madam, I hope there is no
offense in a little Waggery --


None at all, Sir.


I don't use to take the freedom of being so familiar with the Ladies --


I do believe you.


Indeed I don't; I pay a greater Respect to your Sex: And had I known you were
a Woman before, I had kept my distance --


Fie, fie, Sir, Ceremony among Friends! Though you know me now to be a Woman, you
need not keep a distance. What though I have disappointed you in your way, I may
make you amends in my own --


So you may indeed, Madam --


You guess what I mean, Abbe?


If you would be but so gracious.


How gracious would you have me be?


Ah! you will never grant me the favor --


What favor?


Why -- to say nothing of this business.


Is that the favor?


That Is all, Madam? the greatest favor you can do me; and then you do my
business


Can you part with any Money now to me, now I Am a Woman?


Here are a hundred Luidores in this Purse --


To muzzle the Scandal.


And I Will get you a Husband into the Bargain.


She Will keep your Council, Abbe.


Hem, hem, hem!


And in the scarcity of Men, you will do her a mighty favor, I can tell her, to
secure a Husband for her


Hold you your Tongue, Sir. You shall have a Wife too, if Floriante will
content you; that Rogue Palmer has betrayed me


No body shall betray you; we are all Friends: But this Lady and I have a
favor to beg of you


A favor to beg of me! Any thing, any thing, as many favors as you please;
it is but asking, and having, in the humor I am in, Gentlemen


Our Friend, Ilford, has married your Niece Volante, and you must give your
Consent to the Wedding


Give my Consent to the Wedding! Why, I Will dance at the Wedding. I Will have a
Fiddle, and a young Fellow to tickle me, and teach me to Caper. Gads so; I
don't know what Legs I stand upon at the news on it! I Will be as brisk as the
Bridegroom the first Night. But we shall neither of us hold it; twon't last the
Year round with us; I Am an old Fellow, that is the truth on it, it is done with me
already; I Am upon my last Legs. But I have Floriante and Charlot to provide for
still; Poor Girls! while they are in a Nunnery, they lie upon my Conscience:
let me but bring them into the World again, and I Will be contented to go out on it
--


Not yet a great while, Abbe.


As soon as I can get my self in the mind.


We Will keep you in another mind.


Nay, I am easily persuaded; but I have done with you.


The Lady Abbess is consenting to their Escape.


Being a Kinswoman, she was easily persuaded to give 'em an Opportunity.


It Is near the time now; would I had Ilford here.


Why, I am here; I Will stand and fall by you.


I must not now expose you.


If you can but carry 'em off, the business is laid to your hands.


My business is over in this Town; and I had best get off while I can; for fear
of bringing a worse business upon me


What Floriante means by this Invitation to me, I cannot tell; it is a favor she
never vouchsafed me before: Perhaps the apprehension of taking the Habit which
her Father intends she shall, has wrought upon her to consent rather to marry
me: But let her consent, and design what she please, if she puts her self into
my power, as to Night she says she will, I design to let her see, how very
little I value that favor, for which I must be obliged more to her
Confinement, then to her Inclination, or Choice. Stand close, here is Company


I am as full of apprehension, as an old Soldier upon the Guard of a
Counterscarp; where his Fears cannot be more uneasy, than my Hopes are now


He should be an Englishman, by the Similitude, to let his Friends know, from
his own mouth, that he has made a Campaign


This is the backside of the Nunnery --


And the Garden Door -- I think I hear it open --

O Floriante!


Floriante!


Stand fast, we are set upon.


You must not meet the danger --


Fall on, and kill the Ravisher --

Come, my fair Fugitive, you must along with me.


What noise was that?


Some help, I hope.


How my Sister Charlot has succeeded, under my Name, with her Count, to morrow
will discover


Ha! the Count then has the wrong Woman.


Would Valentine were come.


O would he were to help me!


Who Is there? a Man wounded?


One of your Servants; if you are Floriante.


I am.


And wounded in your Cause.


I Am sorry for it; do you belong to Valentine?


I do.


Where is he?


He got off safe; and if you will lend me your charitable hand, I Will guide you to
him


Rogues, Sons of Whores, and Cowards!


Sir Antony.


Here am I.


Floriante!


Valentine!


I was afraid I had lost you.


Here Is an honest man was conducting me to you, one of your Friends.


One of my Friends! He Is one I did not reckon upon, if he be -- This is one of
Count Verole's Bravo's


I am; and had not you interrupted me, I had done my Master service; carried
the Lady to him


What a Mischief have I escaped --


Thou art a gallant Fellow, and do deserve a better Master; but thou have
done thy duty, and I will do mine; carry him home, and get a Surgeon to him --


Well; I run a mighty venture.


Of loosing a Maidenhead, I grant you.


I may Repent --


The keeping of it so long.


I may repent at leisure.


You may indeed, if you don't make haste; for we must expect to be pursued.


You and I, Madam, are much about a size; what if we change Clothes; it may
favor your Escape, if you come to be followed


Admirably thought on! Madam, you need not make a scruple of shifting before
Sir Antony; whom, from this time, you may know to be a Woman


A Woman!


Now for my Petticoats again --


Sir, I must thank you for the care you have shown of my Family; though I believe
it has carried you farther then you are aware off: This is my Daughter Charlot


Charlot!


Charlot!


The very same. But Floriante is obliged to you; you meant this favor to her:
But by this time, she has put her self into the care of a Gentleman, who will
find a kinder away of disposing her, then into the hands of her Father


Dishonorable Girl!


If it be possible, I Will recover her, and yet revenge my Love.


But Charlot, how came you to think of running away with Valentine, when you
know I designed you to marry him


Why, I thank you, Sir, you designed very well for me; But I was too well
acquainted with Valentine, and my Sister's thoughts, to depend over much upon
that hope: I knew there was no parting them; therefore consented the easier to
assist her, in getting out of the Nunnery


Very well.


Very well Brother!


Let her go on.


I began to apprehend the danger of staying behind in a place, and profession,
wholly disagreeable to my humor


And well you might.


I thought fit to provide for my self.


In good time you did, Niece.


And accordingly, in my Sister's name, I sent to Count Verole; he came at the
time appointed, expecting Floriante: But Valentine, by what accident, I know
not, coming before his time, knowing nothing of me, or my Plot upon the Count,
took me for her, called me Floriante, upon which his Bravo's fell upon
Valentine: But the Count in a more gentle-manly regard to his Person,
encountered me, and brought me where you find me


But methinks the Count, taking you for Floriante, his old Mistress, might have
made another use of his Victory, then to have brought you in triumph to your
Father


I expected he would indeed; but by what he said to me, I found he had little
or no design in coming there; but to revenge himself upon my Sister, and her
scorn


I Am glad he has no other design upon her.


And so am I indeed, Sir.


Why Charlot? You are not in Love with the Count?


Not so much in love with the Count, as I am out of love with a Nunnery: Any
man had been as welcome


Well, well; if Valentine be not hurt, this matter will clear of it self --


And so it will, I warrant you.


Why, how a Man may be mistaken in his Friends! I could not have believed it;
(had not one of their underling Rogues told me so himself) that any one could
have been so cheated, as I have been, by my own Countrymen -- If I durst but
send any of 'em a Challenge, I might get some of my money again; but that may
draw me into a worse Praemunire, then I have yet been in. Let me see; Cannot I
have a safer Revenge upon 'em? Valentine has stoll'n a Fortune, and entrusted
me to bring a Father to marry em; now if I should go wilfully, in a mistake, to
the Gentlewoman's own Father, for a License to marry 'em. The truth on it is, I
have a mind to forbid the Banes, and get her my self, if I can; for Floriante
is a Woman of Quality --


Do you know her, Sir?


Yes. Sir, I think I do.


Then as you are a Gentleman, assist me; thus far I have News of her.


I am a Gentleman, Sir; you shall find me a Gentleman: And I Will tell you more
News of her; I Will carry you to the very place, where she is, Sir; and that is as
much as you can expect from a Gentleman, when a Friend is concerned


It is indeed, Sir, more then I expected; pray along with me.

Valentine with Floriante in Sir Antony 's, and Sir Antony in her Clothes.


So far we are safe, Ladies, and the shifting your Habits will secure us so:
Would Sir Gentle would come again; you're grave at the thought of him


Men of your Conversation and Experience in the World, Valentine, seldom like
the Women you marry


Because we seldom marry the Women we like.


Well, since Marriage at best is a Venture, I had as good make it my self, as
let another make it for me, at my Cost


To let a Father choose for you in Love, is as unlucky, as when you are in
fancy at play, and pushing at a Sum, to desire another to throw out your hand


I Will be hanged if that fool Sir Gentle has not betrayed us.


Yonder he comes indeed, with a Rabble of Rogues at his heels.


There Is no resisting 'em; provide for your selves as well as you can.

I have yet a Trick to cozen 'em.


See, see, upon sight of us, they have quitted their Prize: Is this their
English Gallantry? They Are out of sight already. Let 'em go; the Lady is our
Game


I Will make some of 'em know to their Cost, that by using me so little like a
Gentleman, they have taught me to do as I do, and use 'em as they deserve


Now Floriante, you find you have thrown your self a way, upon a Fellow that
has not the spirit to stand by you, or himself, to keep your Folly in
countenance


Pray Sir, a word with you --


Well Madam: What can you say to me?


Why, I say, you're an Ass to run about to disturb other People: I am Sir
Antony Love, not Floriante; don't discover me for your own sake; but get you
gone about your business, and leave me to this English man


I Will take his Advice, for fear of being laughed at: Sir, you have behaved your
self so like a Man of Honor in this business, that I must desire you to take
care of the Lady, while I go to inform her Father of what has happened


Yes, yes; I Will take care of her, I warrant you. Why, what a lucky Rogue am I!
upon my first inclination to play the Knave, to have so good an occasion of
doing it

And indeed, who would take a trust upon him, but for the privledge and benefit
of breaking it? -- So Madam, now I have you in my Care


You are a civil Gentleman, I know you.


You shall know me for a civil Gentleman, if you please; tho I am a Knight,
where I am not familiar


I know you are, Sir; you may have pity for me.


Alack a day! I have indeed, a heart brim-full for you.


You will not force me to marry that Monster?


Not I, as I hope to be saved, Madam; nothing against fancy.


To throw away my Youth, Beauty, and Fortune, which you know are not
contemptible


Incomparable, Madam; incomparable; your Youth and Beauty, without your Fortune.


Would they were worth your asking.


Would I might have 'em for asking.


Valantine I despair of; but if there be an Enlish-man, as an Englishman he
must be --


Why, I am an Englishman; and would marry you.


The sooner you secure me, the better then.


I think so too, Madam.


Why here is a Night of Action indeed; Ilford, you began the Dance with Volante;
and Count, I hope you will continue it, with my Niece Charlot: As for Valentine
and Floriante, they have had their frisk in a corner by this time, or he is not
the Man I take him for


When you fell into my hands to Night; had I known my good Fortune, I had
improved it then: But now I have it, in having you -- And happier yet, in
having your Consent


You have my Blessing both --


You may appear, we are all of a Family now, Cozen Germans, and Friends -- Come
here is a Pair that wants your Blessing too


I cannot deny it now -- Rise and be happy.


I have a Blessing too for you, my Girls; Five thousand Crowns a piece more
than I designed you; and a Thousand extraordinary for her who brings me the
first Boy; a small Gratuity, Gentlemen, to keep up your Fancy, and encourage
your pains, that you may not think it unprofitable Labor upon your Wives


But why in Sir Antony's Clothes, Floriante? Where is this mad Knight?


Somewhere in my Petticoats: But the Count can give you the best Tidings of him.


I left him with one Sir Gentle Golding; one whom you are beholden to; for
familiarly, upon the first word, he betrayed you, and carried me to seize you


Well, I don't doubt but she will give us a handsome Revenge upon him.


She? Who?


Sir Antony, Sir; For this Sir Antony after all, is a Woman.


A Woman!


Aye, pox take her, she is a Woman.


Then I am free indeed.


And I am happy.


At leisure I Will tell you all her story.


Now, I am sufficiently revenged on Valentine and Sir Antony for cheating me; I
think I have paid 'em in their own Coin: And disappointed the Count too, in
marrying Floriante


Floriante!


Come Father-in-Law, this business will out I see; if you will give us your
blessing, so; if not, I shall begin upon your Daughter without saying Grace


Much good may do you, Sir, with your Bride.


Aye, aye; we must all wish you Joy, Sir; You have a Blessing sufficient in a
good Wife --


If you know when you're well.


O deliver me! What do I see!


Why you see your old Mrs. Lucy, in your new Lady-wife; we are all Witnesses of
your owning your marriage


I do not own it -- I Will hang like a Dog, drown like a blind Puppy, die and be
damned, but I Will be divorced from her


That Is your nearest way to Divorce.


And will save the trouble of Doctor's Commons.


Come, come, I Will put you in a better; There are old Scores between you and
Mrs. Lucy -- You have made her a Lady indeed, which shows a grateful Nature in
you, and will sound well in the Ears of the World. But to support her Quality
--


Her Qualities will support that.


Out of your Two thousand pounds a Year, give her a Rentcharge of Five
hundred, and she shall never trouble you more, not so much as to be a Godfather
to another Man's Child upon her Body, which may otherwise inherit your Acres


Why there is the Devil on it again, to Father another man's Children, when one is
not so much as akin to 'em! Well, any Composition to be rid of her; I find
it is a Blessing I must pay for


Come, come, we must have a Dance to all these Weddings.


Thus Coxcombs always the best Husbands prove;
When we are faulty, and begin to rove,
A separate Maintenance supplies our Love.

When we have Mistresses above our Sense,
We must redeem our Persons with our Pence.

PUrsuing Beauty, Men descry
The distant Shore, and long to prove
(Still richer in Variety)
The Treasures of the Land of Love.
We Women, like weak Indians, stand
Inviting, from our Golden Coast,
The wandering Rovers to our Land:
But she, who Trades with 'em, is lost.
With humble Vows they first begin,
Stealing, unseen, into the Heart:
But by Possession settled in,
They quickly act another part.
For Beads, and Baubles, we resign,
In Ignorance, our shining Store.
Discover Nature's richest Mine,
And yet the Tyrants will have more.
Be wise, be wise, and do not try,
How he can Court, or you be Won:
For Love is but Discovery,
When that is made, the Pleasure's done.
NO more, Sir, no more, I Will even give it over
I see it is all but a Cheat;
Your soft wishing Eyes, your Vows, and your Lies,
Which thus so you often repeat.

It Is you are to blame, who foolishly claim
So silly a lean Sacrifice:
But Lovers, who pray, must always obey,
And bring down their Knees, and their Eyes.

Of late you have made, Devotion a Trade
In Loving, as well as Religion:
But you cannot prove, through the Ages of Love,
any Worship was offered but One.

That one let it be, in which we agree,
Leave Forms to the Maids, who are younger:
We Are both of a mind, make have, and be kind,
And continue a Goddess no longer.

IN vain Clemene you bestow
The promised Empire of your Heart,
If you refuse to let me know
The wealthy Charms of every part.
My Passion with your Kindness grew,
Though Beauty gave the first desire:
But Beauty only to pursue,
Is following a wandering Fire.
As Hills in Perspective suppress
The free Enquiry of the Sight:
Restraint makes every Pleasure less,
And takes from Love the full delight.
Faint Kisses may in part supply
Those eager Longings of my Soul;
But oh! I Am lost, if you deny
A quick possession of the whole.
THE Ladies have a lonely Summer past,
In hopes kind Winter would return at last.
The Seasons change; but Heroes at the same,
A Twelvemonth running in pursuit of Fame.
Theirs may be good, but they have spoilt our Game.
Some weak amends this thin Town might afford,
If honest Gentlemen would keep their word.
But your lewd Tunbridge-Scandal that was moving,
Foretold how sad a Time would come for Loving.
Sad Time indeed when you begin to write:
It Is a shrewd sign of wanting Appetite,
When you forget your selves, to think of Wit.
Whilst thus your Itch is only to bespatter,
Your Cupid is transformed into a Satyr:
Nothing of Man about you, all over Beast;
Submitting your chief pleasure to your Jest.
Then Time will come (for Ireland falls of Course,
And must send back her Conquerours, and ours)
When each of us our Losses do recover,
Will mend her Fortune in a Soldier-Lover:
They Will use us better much, then you have done,
Take us in, passing, like an open Town,
And plunder, do their business, and be gone.
Or if, at leisure, they lie down to woo,
They Will rather make us Whores, then call us so:
Not send a whispering Libel through the Town,
To blab the Favor out, before it is done;
And maul the Ladies only in Lampoon.
But if they write in a Sententious Strain,
Two Lines conclude the Travels of their Pen;
One, only to know where, and the other, when.
And we can give a Lover leave to write,
When all his Bills are to be paid at sight.
O! would our peaceful days were come again;
Then I might act it, on and off, a Queen.
When once the Child was turned into her Teens,
You could not find a Maid behind the Scenes.
But now your keeping humor's out a door,
We must dye Maids, or marry to be poor.
IF Novelty has any Charms to move,
We hope, to Night, we have raised your drooping Love:
Not to the Youngsters of a noisy Pit,
Whose Tongues and Mistresses outrun their Wit:
But to the graver Sinners of the Bench.
Who, from your Mothers Maids, have loved a Wench:
Who, cheek by joul with Time, have handled down
The Vices of all Ages to your own:
Here Is a Variety, that may delight
The Palate of each Ages Appetite.
To you I Am sent, you who have dearly known
The several Rates of Pleasure in this Town;
And find at last, it is worth but your Half-Crown.
You Will hear with Patience a dull Scene, to see,
In a contented lazy waggery,
The Female Montford bare above the knee.
She makes a mighty noise, like some of you,
Who often talk of what you never do:
She Is for all Womankind, and aws the Town,
As if her Husband's Breeches were her own.
She Is been to Night our Hero, though a Female,
Show me but such a Whoremaster, though a Male
Who through so many shifts, is still the same,
Pursues all Petticoats, preserves her Fame,
And though she can do nothing, keeps the Name.
Some of your Names are up too we suppose,
Who turned of fifty, still would pass for Beau's:
You dance, you dress, you sing, you keep a noise,
And think you're young, because you herd with Boys.
To such as you, there is no Mercy owing;
Your talking must not serve for your not doing.
And since your feeble failings within doors
Are known to us, be wise, and even Scores;
Supply our Wants, and we'll conceal all yours.
No matter what you can, or cannot do,
You shall cheat others still, if we cheat you:
Keep us but rich, and fine, and we shall find
Young Lovers, always able to be kind.

