PRologues are grown so plenty, yet so dear
Our author choos'd to have no prologue here,
His is an invitation to a feast
He hopes your stomachs will not ill digest,
Yet be not over curious, since he has spent
As much as on his Credit could be lent;
He Is not a Poet yet upon his blessing
Has charged the Cooks be careful in the dressing.
Expect no choice of dainties of the prime;
As at the Temple at a reading time,
Or that our young Cooks are experienced so
They can please every pallat: this we know
They may in time, then in the mean while
Grace their endeavors with a courteous smile,
To the Author and the Actors too prove free,
Spare not for claps and first begin with me.
Exeunt.


MIserable Shipton in what a poor condition has it pleased the powers to place
thee! sure all the Eyes of Happiness did look a Squint at my Nativity, and all
the Destinies combined to wrap me up in endless poverty


This is excellent her low condition does lay the foundation for my siege, i will
listen to what follows


How pleasant and thrice happy is the fortune of other Mortals, how bravely do
they live and enjoy themselves and their estates! How like petty dieties are
they seated in their palaces! and to such poor Cottage bred Creatures as my
self extend their generous Hospitality! how nobly do they pass over their lives
and with odours and perfumes enter their earthly graves, whose fame is still
surviving by their Princely Pedigree? why was not this my lot poor miserable
Shipton


Better, better yet, she is ambitious, and I am half confident she is my own.


What pleasant life have I? forlorn desolation? What estate or subsistence? The
Alms of the Parish? What Grave but a Ditch? And for my pedigree can only boast
of poverty? I was wretched by my Parents indigency, and by their death in my
Minority, thrice, thrice more Miserable! Am I not flesh and blood? Has not
Nature bestowed on me the like perfections, each Mortal now can boast off? Why
am I so low then when others are so high? Why do I court the ground when others
in their glorious pinacles grasp the sky? Well hence forth will I scorn their
Alms and gifts of Charity

Directly or indirectly I will find a way,
To make me rich in Pride and Money too, but stay.

Do, do mount higher in ambition yet and then,
Thou Wilt fall so low, thou never shall rise again.

I am too presumptuous and do offend these powers we are bound in the strictest
obligations to obey: No be content in time thou will see Heaven will give thee
more felicity


Ha! This startles me does her ambition thaw, I Will to her e're she too much
repents

Fair Maid, nay startle not, pardon me that I have been a gentle auditor to
your sorry tale, yet think of me, as I seem to be; a Gentleman well descended,
and not of so mean a spirit to divulge the least Syllable of what I have heard,
but be as secret as the silent Air


Sir your Carriage and discourse confirm you a Gentleman; and since you have
over heard what I never intended to declare to any: My hope is in your promise:
You will be Privy


I Will be thy bosom Cabinet, and since at first sight I see thou art
meritorious: It Is in my power and I am willing to bring thee to advancement:
Nay such honor as shall touch the height of those to whom thou have been
subservient, and spurn at those that hitherto have slighted thee


Sir you promise fair.


I Will perform fairer, Therefore to morrow morn at sun rising, under the broad
Beech-tree, in Naes-borough Grove fail not to meet me


Upon my Life I will not,


Then thou shall see, i will find a means to

Work thy content, and thereby,
Transform thy sorrow to felicity

I thank you sir.


Till then fair Maid farewell,
This will be good news to the King of Hell.

This promise makes me proud, perform it and thou art noble

The Parish Alms gifts and Cottages i will scorn
And no more walk in places so forlorn,
To this Event ye powers grant success,
The Sun must usher in my Happiness.

It Is a mad life thou leadst.


A merry life, the only life? I am like a man finding a Table furnished to his
hand, as mine is still to me, prayers for the sounder, I thank him he has
maintained my house this six years, not only keeps my wife, but me and all my
family: I am at his Table, he puts me to nothing, no rent, nor Church duties,
no not so much as the scavenger, the happiest state that ever man was born to:
I walk out in a morning, come to breakfast, find excellent cheer, a good fire
in winter, look in my coal house about Midsomer eve* five or six chaldrone new
laid up* look in my back yard, I shall find a pile of fagots that over look the
Church steeple, I say nothing to all this, but smile and gently pin the door
again, when my wife lies Inn, as even now she is on the point of grunting, a
Lady lies not like her, she has her Embossings, Embroiderings, Spanglings, and
I know not what, her Sugar by whole loaves, her wine by Rundlets: I see these
things but like a haypy man

I pay for none at all, yet fools think^t mine,
I have the name, and in his Gold I shine.
This charge the Knight has whilst I without any fear,
Lie soft, sleep hard, drink wine, and eat good cheer.
And then for want of my wife, have I a legion of Mistresses.


But prithee when do exspect Sir Oliver?


Why to morrow so his last letter said.


So then we may hope for a recruite.


Hope, we will command it, he must be liberal to me, but mum here comes David.

How now David any news for me from Sir Oliver


Yes, I have a Letter for you Sir.


He is in good health I hope.


I hear nothing to the contrary, but I must bid you farewell Sir, business
calls me away, otherwise Mr. Shiftwel you and I would not part so driely


Farewell honest David

So now I Will open thee.

My dear Shiftwel.


That Is lovingly.


O it is flattery I fear

In the last you received from me, I told thee how speedy I would be in my
return, both for the love I bear to my Lady and thy self, but since several
businesses prohibit my intent, so that now I cannot be in town till the latter
end of next week, but then I will be most libera


This does not make the old Proverb good, short and sweet, for this is short


But damnable sower.


Well poverty parts good company, so for the present farewell, next time we
meet, I hope we shall be in a condition too fare better


Fear not for I do live without regard,
The pander needs must have a free reward,

ROger earry the Portmantle to my Lodging, I Will follow presently.


I will forsooth.

Ha Noll, is it so in faith has a young Mrs, restored a new fire into your
decayed parts, I thought 'twas impossible for nature to broach another vessel
of strength into thy whithered veins, well if it be so, so let it be: when I
lay by thy side thou tookest no care in the night but to mumble out thy prayer
and Pater noster: many times when I have endeavored to force a motion in thee,
to give life to thy dead spirits alas! I was answered wiith hollow groans, and
excuses of age? and to imagine the truth, I believe it is rather thy money then
thy fortitude that quenches the appetite of that woman thou frequents for
otherwise by experience I can tell her thirst would rather increase then her
desire be satisfied: well I Will pay thee in thy Coin, I have not a face
altogether contemptible, nor money for properties to preserve it from
wrinckles, and I hope ere long this City will afford me a Gallant

Whore-hound revenge is counted no disgrace.
Cuckold thy horns will quickly bud apace,

MY brave spirits the world is now in distraction, confusion meets in every
place, and will ere long involve it self into a second Chaos: now with all the
hellish art you are masters of, scout about and make the consciences of men as
black as Hell it self: mean while Alecto let it be your care to cherish our
Traitors in the lower vault. Massanello that proud fisher boy that durst usurp
so much disloyalty against his Prince, to raise forces against him and make his
subjects most perfidious, the like to Matchavile that wheadling Traitor, Synon
that betrayed the noble Trojans, also to Hanibal the noblest Hellhound Hell can
boast of, but who comes here


Great Prince it is Radamon.


Now Radamon the news with thee.


Great prince the news I bring,
Will make your Queen and all our Furies sing.

Declare it.


I have been with Shipton a poor Alms wench to whom as she was deploring her
sad condition, I appeared apparelled like a very handsome Gentleman, gave her
large promises, to make good which early this Morn, at Sunrising I am to meet
her under the broad Beech tree in Na^sborough Grove

Then I do not doubt
To make effectual what I have been about.

Well done Radamon thou art a providing Devil and does much for the Interest of
our Kingdom, we thank thee for thy care and diligence

Come now lets revel and with such delight
We Will spend the tedious minutes of this night.

Now we will go visit our Helveechans that have been
Inrichers of our Kingdom by their sin.

NOw for Moneylack he will behold and bless himself, and with confidence swear i am
a limb of a Devil. How Scrape one of my old Usurers! Pox on his picture! Now do
I quake as if I had had the standing Ague these seven years! yet perforce I
must be courageous and speak to him: Mr. Scrape your obleiged Servant Sir


Mr. Shiftwel how have you done this long while, I can never have the happiness
to see you at our end of the town


No faith nor never shall

Why Sir, so and so, I make a heard shift to keep head and shouldders together.


Well but to put off this discourse, you and I must be a little more serious.


Now it begins to work.


You know Mr. Shiftwell, the times expired my money due, and your bond
forfeited, and now what would you have me do? when I lent my money I appear an
Angel, but now I call for it again I Will warrant you a very devil


'Flesh! what shall I do with him? there is no way to set him going but
Hectoring. Why Sir I cannot help it, you must stay till I have it, you know like
a Gentleman I pawned you my Land for the tenth part of the value, and now times
are dead, no money stirring, it is a bard case, you must forbear longer or I
shall grow very angry


Fret and spare not, I know no obligation lies upon me with my honey to feed
drones, but in short my money I want, and my money i will have, or it shall go
hard with you


Flesh how the Rogue railes


More too blame thou in not providing better to support them, your debt is an
estate for a good man pray acquaint me how were my thousand pounds employed


How a Dun upon Shiftwel, I am come to my wish, here Il^ keep out of sight and
hear all, I know no object that could more content me. Ha my Uncle Scrape,
better and better, but I Will be silenced till the future


I^su^t not on my Calamity good Sir, though being a Debtor and a slave to him
that lends, I must endure it, yet hear me speak thus much in my own defense,
losses at sea, and those Sir, great and many by storms and tempest, not
domestical Riot in soothihg of my wifes humor, or my own has brought me to this
low ebb


Sure it is an old debt, he pleads his former trade of Merchandise, it is well the
old Rogue knows it to be no otherwise


Suppose this true.


Nay it is a real truth without supposals Sir, besides can you think in your
unquestioned wisdom that the ruin of me, (once an able Merchant) can raise
your reputation with good men


No if it thrive with him, hang me as 'twill damn him if he be not converted,
for all he is my Uncle


Suppose this Sir, if you permit me a month more, it wi l not be your loss nor
prejudice, and there was never yet but shame and scandal in a victory when
Rebels unto reasons passion fought it


Our Divines cannot speak more effectually.


Shall I be talked out of my Money.


No Sir, but entreated to do your self a benefit and preserve that you possess
entire


How Friend?


By making me your beadsman, when I eat my thanks, next Heaven, will be paid
to your mercy, when your ships are at sea, my prayers will swell the sails
with prosperous winds and guard them from tempests and Pirates: keep your ware
houses from fire, or quench them with my tears


If this could be.


It must or my devotion lies:


Well you have prevailed, take a month longer, but see you fail not, if you
do I Will protest you first, and that done, have the Statute made for Bankrupts
served upon you


If I do it is in your power, but not in mine to shun it.


But do you hear: no talk of it, should this arrive at twelve on the exchange,
I should be laughed at for my foolish pity, which money men hate, so farewell


So he is gone.


Ha! so full faith and plead poverty, I Will out and scorn him: Ha, ha, ha.


Well I Will abide your jears for once, and hope it may be your turn another time.


In troth very likely, but I have seen and heard all, excuse my manners.


I think I worked him pretty well for all he was your Uncle,


Nay and with such Devotion too.


Never did I pray so, so heartily before,

But come now lets to the next Tavern steer,
And there my hoarse pipes with Canary clear;

Puffed up with pride I am grown ambitious, can I forget to give, a bow to the
humble Milkmaids: can I forget a cursie making to my liberal Almes-givers? can
I forget every Sundaies going to the Church porch to beg a loaf? yes I can
forget all

Shipton no more now shall be,
Beholding to their liberallity.
But ha! I see my happiness, the Sun shines clear: come, come my worthy
Gallant, if thou do fail to effect what thou have promised me, all my
expectations are but Air! but why do I doubt thy gratitude, I am confident in
thy nobleness, and will vaunt upon it: soar high Shipton, higher yet, and
think thou never wast, what too sure thou have been! Ha, ha, ha, me thinks I
shall laugh to see a poor wench beging for an Alms, though I have don't my
self, ha! for that very word I could correct my insolence! I will avouch I
near was poor: hang all beggarry, for my expected happiness assures me I was
born to know endless felicity, not the fruits of woe. But stranger things I yet
conceive! This Gentleman could not having no ground of acquaintance promise me
this preferment without a cause? no my youth and beauty stirred him to it! I am
in my teens and that alone must be the motive! this I conjecture, and this
effect ye powers for my future bliss

My pretty Damsel I must confess I have been somewhat tardy, but now come to
perform my promise beyond thy expectation, guess at my meaning


Alas! I cannot prophecy Sir.


Then know I intend to marry thee, and have brought these my attendants to
witness i


Are you real Sir?


By all that is real I am: behind this Grove I have a horse and pillion for my
Spouse, these my attendants are nobly mounted too, we have not Jades that need
the switch and spur, but will run with all speed to perform the rights that to
our marriage shall be appurtenant, bestow thy self upon me and all my Fortunes
and Estate are thine


Now I see I prophesied rightly: I am ever happy, Thee and thy estate, a noble
Husband


A match lets go,

But first join hands that nothing may our he arts devide.
I am thy bridegroom. Ship. And I am thy Bride.

COme, come devide the spoil, share and share like*


Withal my heart: there Hodge there is for thee.


Very right.


And there Jug there is for thee.


True to a farthing.


And there Bab's for thee, and here is for my self, and the odd overplus lets
give to the Fiddler


A very good Motion, for now after our long puritanical praying lets spend a
little of what we got in meriment


Prithee Greg. what is it thou starest at so?


Why at yonder thach't cottage, me thinks it would make a pretty palace for us
Princes of the ragged Regiment to in habit in


O that was old Shipton the ditch diggers.


I but he is dead, Hodge, and has left it to his daughter a poor Alms wench.


And yet as proud as the Devil.


I wonder what is become of her, I have not seen her at Alms giving a pretty
while, and she did not use to hang an Arse


Pish let her be where she will, we keep the Fiddler here to no purpose.


Well strike up Fiddler we will take a dance, and then make enquiry after Agatha
Shipton for the purchase of her cottage


I that have lead a life until of late in spite of death, passed through the
dangers of it without regard, am now won and vanquished: There is an heroic
Amazon hard by, whose eyes have darted fire intomy breast, which nothing but
her kindness can extinguish, but if she should prove cruel I shall soon be
ashes I Must I thus yield? shall I forget the sound of Martial drums, the
warlike noise of Trumpets, to list to the inticeing harmony of instruments
touched by P^ikellas hand? shall I forget the ordering of a camp? to ride great
horses to besiedgs a City? to undermine a Castle, to raise Bulwarks, and all
for the love of a simple woman? it must be so: these legs that were wont to
lead armed men to battle, I now must use in dances: this hair that used to
be covered with a Helm cloggy with sweat and blood, I now must daily powder:
these hands that were used to wave a dreadful sword instead of iron gauntlets,
now must wear perfumed gloves: I that was wont to be constantly under a
Chyrurgeons hands, must have a Barber now to keep me neat: O Love thou art
divine, and can transform

A man from that he was, it is in vain,
Tn think to shun the thieg thou do constrain.
O heaven if I can but win my love, it will be a conquest deserves a trophee
far above

My best of victories: I Will go and try her,
'Twas love that kindled, love must quench my fire.


Who art thou,


I Sir.


I you, what are you to good to be spoke too?


I am Roger.


By that I know thee not, is Roger in a Captains Roll? ist't writ?


Yes Sir in the Parsons book; the day thereof my baptism is set down.


And in that honor, how often have thou ere fought with Infidels and killed a
score or two


Not I, a score or two said you Captain, nay then I should never escape, for
i will promise you many one is hanged for killing of one


Fie what an ignorance is this have thou a mind to become a soldier?


Indeed I cannot resolve you, I am with a Mistress, i will ask her whether she will
turn soldier too, and then if I like it there is an end, but pray Captain what
is a soldier


A soldier is a man that ventures his life a hundred times a day, and in his
Princes and his Countries cause stands Canons shot, and when his bodies full of
wounds, lies all night in the field, and sleeps upon his Helm


Good Captain pardon me, neither I nor my Mistress will be soldiers then,
venture my life so many times a day, there is more safety in turning Theif, marry
I thought a soldier had not been such a fool, but now I think on it good
Captain persuade my Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, and all the kindred I
have to become soldiers, that they may all be killed quickly, I swear Captain
you should loose nothing by it


Base Coward.


Good Sir what is the meaning of that word Coward?


A Coward is a fellow as base as thou, one that does spend his precious time in
sloth, cares not what alterations Kingdoms have, so be at home may welter in
his pleasures, a fellow that had rather sit all day smoking Tobaco and
carouseing cups, then dye his sword in blood of Enemies


Why then Sir indeed I am a very Coward, it is better by half then a soldier, I
know there is far more pleasure in a glass of good wine then in bullets whizing
about ones ears, and Pikes and Halberts beating out ones teeth


Thou dungil wretch.


Nay pray Sir be not angry, for I vow I should never digest the soldiers life.


Thou earthen minded slave it is pity thou should eat or drink thou have no
better thoughts


Good Sir give me leave to be of my own mind and a Coward, I am sure there is no
wise man but won'd say as I do, what have I to do with souldery, let those
follow wars that at are weary of their lives


Thou art as dungil a minded Rascal as ever I heard, and deservest to be
hanged, and so I leave thee


Go hang your self my Hufting Captain, what have I to do with your wars two, I
should never endure to hear a gun shot off, for hearing the report of our
Stewards pistol, does many times make me endanger my breeches


Stand at a distance, me thinks this state becomes me.


HA! what Bell is that?

O Yes, if any man or woman, in City, Town, or Country can tell me tidings of
Agatha Shipton, the daughter of Solomon Shipton Ditch digger lately deceased,
let them bring word to the Crier of the Village, and they shall be well
rewarded for their pains


Curse on that tongue what makes this cry after me? can they not bestow the
Alms that came to my share to some other poor wretch that wants it more then I
do now? no it is not that! upon my life some canting Beggars covetuous of my
cottage have made this way of inquiry for me to purchase it. And if my noble
Lord should have divulged it to these my attendants what I first was, and they
now declare it I should again be wretched for all these delicates: I cannot in
my proud thought be rich if any but himself should know I ever was poor


Pray ean any here tell me tidings of the party I cry off?


No truly honest man.


Then farewell Gentlemen.


This answer does again prop up my spirit.

My worthy servants know me or know me not*
This present kindness never shall be forgot.

Welcome Noble Sir.

I hankes my fair Spouse, I see I am come most opertunely, lets sit and taste
of all the varieties this board is furnished with

-- Attendants in the mean while
Let your dancing make our Lady smile.

Now begone, we must confer in private. Now I am thy Husband and thou art my
Wife, yet know I am no mortal! I am a Devil! these my attendants Devils too! I
can pierce through the air, ransack its Treasures! I can raise thunder and
lightning, stir up Storms, quell Tempests, do or undo any thing to please me!
I Will give thee power too! the winds shall be at thy command, and every thing
else at thy dispose


How matried to an Imaterial Spirit this starteles me, how sweetly could I now
desire my former poverty! but Pride assures me I am happy still, and on that
staff i will lean. Then Fortune turn thy wheel

I am in now and must through,
And to all virtuous acts I bid adiev.
Well having cunningly wone me to you, I must obey and be what you are pleased
to make me


Then after me repeat these following words.

Raziel, Ziragia, Phonthonfancia.
Repeats.


I Shall study to be your humble servant.


Thou art a noble Minister of words: but will thou be my Cabinet, my friend
Roger


I will obey you Sir.


Liberally spoken, when I have opened me, will thou be privy?


Very secret and officious, it is manners in me, your commands shall wedge my
tongue, hedge my heart, and tie a true Lovers knot with the strings of it


Thou art an honest clad of earth, it is pity the malicious Sunshine warmed
thee not into a Diamond


You speak above my brain Sir.


I am marvellously in love with your Lady, Roger.


Wonderful! is my Lady your sweet heart?


Yes but ignorant of my affection yet.


I would be drunk if you were my Master Sir.


I Roger, I would have a Wine cellar to the purpose Man, but do know any
possible way to win her


Sir I am passing empty of invention: but an't please you would you marry her?


No you may swear it, but I must counterfeit yes, why do wonder at it?


She does nothing all day but read merry Comedies, and every night spend two or
three hours on a Tragedy of a merry fellow Dametas, and a company of strange
named Lovers, she is no more a huswife then you or I Sir, on my own proper
knowledge I vow and protest it


Thou art too earnest my old faced Saturn, I like her near the worse, huswifery
is the superficies of a gentle Female, and the parenthesis of a Lady which may
be well left out


You are a scholar Sir, and your bookship shall direct me,


I should be glad to cope with your Lady Sir, me thinks I am of a prompter
expression then usal: Ha! your Lady said I? faith see where she comes


I vanish in a mist then.


He out with a Poetical Solique for my Praeludium. The gaudy stars are not more
full of glee, when golden Phoebus sets in the West, nor do the cheerful
Birds with more delight rejoice at the new livery of the spring, then I to have
this Miracle of Beauty enter into the knowledge of my Eyes


He speaks well, I would he meant in earnest, the gentleman seems very
deserving, but he is somewhat wild I imagine


She shall be stoutly accosted, impudence is a very happy quality in a wooer I
perceive


He comes.


Lady I credit you are not a puny in the Court of Cupid, and therefore I hope
need not the tedious circumstances of an Annual service: I am bold to tell you
plainly I love you, and if I find occasion I will maintain it boldly


Pray Sir Desist.


Never, sweet Lady, my descent I know you doubt not, and my love you need not,
for while I live I shall love you, and when you dye your memory


Your carriage and discourses Sir, show you are a Traveller.


My boldness she means: Madam I have been one and can declare the Habits,
Conditions and Scituations of diverse Countries; nay more my fornights
observation of the Antipodes, this will make her wonder


O strange have you been there Sir? I admire how you ever came thither!


Madam I can tell you, but should I tell you, I should afright you more then
the doleful groans of a dying Creature in the hideous night


Nay if it be so terrible, pray sir forbear.


Well put off.


Yet, pray resolve me one thing.


No sooner asked but granted.


Whether the Antipodes have a King.


Yes but he is no man.


I believe so, for I could never credit that any man inhabited there.


There they have no houses neither but the Kings palace, where Sir Francis
Drake was entertained after he had shot the gulf


Possible! I wonder at it.


Nay more they at the Antipodes hear with their noses, smell with their ears,
but taste withal their senses, for they are the most insatiablest gluttons in
the whole world


But I cannot imagine how their senses are so contrary to ours,


Nay and they are opposite to us too.


That indeed I have heard. But you frequent plays, do ye not sir?


Plays they are most commonly my every afternoons recreation.


And you have red many Histories?


Many Lady.


This pleases me too, farewell sir.


Admired Lady leave me not so.


What would you have sir?


Your consent Lady


O expect that hereafter.


Nay dear Lady.


You are too importunate sir farewell.


No matter, I am sure to have thee: how some women are taken with strange
tales? quest onless she is a Widow, but no matter, plenty of money will weave
contempt in a beauty at second hand

Next time we meet I do not doubt to get her,
Hercules could not woo a Lady better.

Thou art well met.


Thanks good Shiftwel.


I have brave news to tell thee, but come let us to the Tavern, and by the
virtue of a glass of wine, 'twil slide off my tongue more sweet


Agreed, but I should call upon a friend about this hour according to
engagement


Nay i will not stay for it is full noon, and I have promised to be Sir Olivers
guess


He Is come to town then.


Yes he came last night, and has commanded noble preparations for the gossiping
to day. Ha! see where he comes


I Will leave you then.


Protest but you shall not, Sir Oliver the humblest of your servants.


Nephew Shiftwel. the only one I wished for.


You are welcome to town Sir, I expected you long before this, till your last
Letter showed good cause to the contray


Indeed I could not possible come till now, nor now neither well, for in the
interim several concerns of mine lies in the trust and confidence of some
persons which I doubt


Your Lady Sir is delivered of a fine plump boy, he will be as notable a wag as
the Father I Will watrant him


I have seen it and blessed it, but to make my promise good, there Nephew
there is ten pieces for you, and come you must be my principal guess to day


It grieves me that I must be forced against my will, I hate the company of
such a crew of Women (as there to be sure I shall find enough) nay and honest
women too: yet for this moneys sake I must, and so good patience guide me, Sir
I cannot deny you, but this Gentleman is my intimate friend and in leaving him
so abruptly, I make a breach of our friendship


Not for the world, with this Gentleman your friend, I invite you for my guess
to day, and will promise you Sir a hearty welcome


Sir I thank you, but would willingly beg your pardon and my excuse, for
probablely my strangeness may be some part of hindrance to mirth in some of
your scotiable guess


Not in the least Sir, I have a Neice that loves to entertain such handsome
Gentlemen as you are


He means my Sister Maria, faith for that words sake go Money-lack.


Nay pray Sir come, no more delays.
My Guess by this are sat and dinner stays!

NOw declare,


Infernal King, I have been my circuit, but each christians heart was so
fortyfied against my attempts, that I was dubious of bringing any news
acceptable to your ear, till at last creeping into a strong water shop amongst
a crew of topers, I partly divided my self and stuck upon each man's tongue, who
presently within the space of a poor moment, warpt out such a number of
ignominous lies, that Hell it self would quake to hear them


I was his second, for in a puff of smoke I crep up their noistrils into their
very brain, and their played a tyrants part in converting their lies into
execrable Oaths: damnation was their constant wish, and so wish I and hope ere
long to make them Charons customers


I have been amongst a crew of Cobblers and Broom-men and have raised an endless
discord, that I dare promise upon penalty of your powerful displeasure,
diversity of murders will be between them committed


I have not been idle neither: I have been scouting among the Lawyers in their
pleading hall, where a cause coming to be heard between a rich Userer and an
Heir, I skipt into the hearts of six affidavit men, who swore point blanck for
the Userers interest, against what was either truth or equity which makes for
the interest of our Kingdom


Well 'twas bravely done, and for this your care and diligence kiss our
Proserpines hand, then run to your several stations to perfect what you have
partly i^tangled: if you meet any of your

Other to brethren, bid them make haste to bring
A fraught of souls to Hells fiery King.

AM I awake or in a dream? Ha! What dingy Hayloft am I left in now? Am I once
more become the miserable Inhabitant of my poor paternal Cottage: Alas! it is
too true! Is this the end of all my pride to be again reduced to my pristine
poverty! How vain is seeming glory! How momentary are all the pleasures that
airy spirits boast off! Decitful Devil am I thy Spouse and so a witch and have
no other habitation but where derision daily laughs me in the face, Why do
thou not build me Castles in the Air that I might throw down Thunder bolts upon
the heads of those that durst up braid me? But ha! what is this! O hellish
Cruelty! Am I Agatha Shipton, surely no! Where Is thy captivating beauty did
inchant insinuating Devils! Here Is nothing left but the bare bones of a decayed
face of four-score years of Age which verifies the Proverb she looks as if the
Hag had red her: Then farewell all future expectation of true felicity I must

Perforce conform my self now to embrace
The spells of utter darkness and disgrace.
How now runaway are you once more come to light again?


Yes Hellibore.


Bore me no Bores do you see you are a Sow for boring of me for all your crooked
Nose


Bless me she is strangely altered!


Sure it is not she!


Sure my Name is not Hodge: Come we come to bid you Money for the purchase of
your Cottage


Keep your Money I want it not, nor any thing else.


Marry come up Potters are you grown so proud, I have known the time you would
have leapt at a crust


Tormentors be gone and trouble me not.


Be gone, we will not or if we do we will send a whole Legion of Admirators to
perplex thee, all the Country shall know of thy Divilish deformity


Are you presumptuous villainies.


Now am I come to supply the Company of those thou wise'y have dismissed and in
recompense of my love thou must practice Murder, Witchcraft, fatal Prophesies
and what not that Hell can boast off


My former vows enforce me to enact what you desire.


Then i will promise thee: Henceforward thou shall be
Admired by Nations for thy Prophecy.

NO more of these costly feasts nor go ssipings.


Ha! Sir Oliver alone i will stand here and lissen.


No, no, I have a Plot to reassume my former an ancient way of living.


How will he leave us? O penurious curre!


I Will repose my trust and Confidence in none but in my self.


Yes i will share with thee villain and put a stop to all thy cunning.


This Letter does prepare the Physic I shortly intend to administer to
Shiftwel and his Wife


Does the plot lie there, then be attentive ears!


This Letter is an Imploration to regain my good wifes favor, with numberless
protestations never so disgracefully to live from her


More Knave thou, but for my own ends i will prevent thee.


But I loose time,

-- I must away,
In Plots there is no danger like delay.

Damned Imposture! but i will not rave nor rage but smoothly put a bar to his
conspiracy, and see he has left me further instructions to proceed, i will read it

My Dear.

Prithee pardon what I have done amiss, and though I have been a prodigal
wanderer once more receive me home into thy favor: It Is but Justice in me to
be submissive since I am so much guilty of ingratitude to the embraces of so
kind a Wife. I protest religiously never to go back into that path of folly
wherein I have been so long hedged, but post to come to thee, Embrace, Enjoy,
Live, and never again to live apart from thee till death seperates me from
being

Thy endeared Husband Sir Oliver.


Very good now I Will go place my Engine, and quickly quench thy new desires.

We both have laid our plots and his design,
Which he think's sure's prevented thus by mine.

HOw easy was I tempted to my ruin! I have a Niece said he, now I know thou
have a fair one two, whose amorus eyes have charmed my heart and made me
subject, to loves Deity! Maria! lovely Maria! to thy beauty I am a Captive and
ever dedicate my self to thy service. How the rushing waves of love do tumble
and beat upon my tender heart. My eyes are very dimne or almost out with gazing
on the Sun whose light is celestial, Me thinks I am in a dream

All things to nature contrary go.
I needs must sleep and love commands it so!
Ha! me thought I heard a heavenly voice singing in the praise of my Maria,

Blessed be that voice, for she is all divine!
And I Am but mortal then she cannot be mine!
But I mast cease.

My dear friend well met, have I not got a noble color.


Faith I have been hard at it, but why so melancholy? thoulookest ill too,
prithe the cause


Truly I am ill, very ill and yet the cause --


What is it prithe tell me?


He is my friend I cannot well deny him, it is love.


Love! in what kind


In the best kind, the worthiest kind! A Cordial Honorable and Honest love.


Honest Love! Ha, ha, ha, Pox on such love, and all the Generation of it. Hang
honest love, hate honest Women, stick to a Cup of good Sack and live as I do,
and thou will never do amiss i will warrant thee. Good Money lack go sleep upon it,
so good night, to morrow morn i will see you again and hope to find you in another
mood. Honestly in love, Ha, ha, ha


But ere you go a word: why d' you pretend
You have a friendship when you slight your friend?
By this ill temper all your love's destroyed
Neglect of kindness makes a kindness void,

Pardon what is past: permit me to implore
Your love to think I loved you as before.
And though my humor ushered out a jest,
It was no spark of falsehood from my breast.
Declare your mind your pleasure i will attend,
Damnation's due to him that fools his Friend.

Then as I go the story I Will relate

May heaven in all things make thee fortunate.

THis is the only life my brave Belswagger.


True, to spend a life musing at home, Pox on such sotts^ness.


No, no thank my stars I have thought of better things.


I but what shall we think of to get us a little more money, I have a great
fancy to take a ramble to London, and your Fathers name wont gain us credit
every where


Not every where, but in some part of London i will engage it shall, but however
being so nigh home I Will make a s^ep to him, perhaps he may be orejoy'd to see me
and prove liberal


Provided you will stay at home and grow reformed.


I Will turn Puritan first.


Nay I cant Imagine thou will leave me


No faith to leave thee in misery would to my conscience be

-- a trouble without end,
He Is no true Christian, that proves false to his Frind.

Enough I Am confident.


Well i will to my Father and return with all speed possible, the mean time let no
thoughts discontent thee, for as I have vow

I Will prove thy Friend and thou shall see
I Will find a plot to make the Miser free.

WEll little does Moneylack think Maria's my Sister, in the end he shall not
doubt of his enterprise, I have left him in good hopes and am stolen to have the
other trial of my Amorous Dame, this is [ knocks the door, and now good luck on
my side

Whoe's there.

A friend.


What is your Name.


As you say that is to be thought on: I must pick-out some strange name. Frank
heart


O Sir cry your mercy I remember you and your suit and will be very serviceable
to you, if now and then you will suffer me to be blithe and full of merry moods


Roger where have been prithee?


At the spiget Sir is it not a very rainy day?


Thou art well washed within I perceive, but Roger is your Lady at leisure to
discourse, your Lady said I see where she comes


Then it is time for me to be gone.


Ha! see where my Gallant is, I shall be courted certainly and perhaps shall
yield


Madam your humble servant; let your lilly white hand enrich my lips.


You are very complemental Sir.


Faith Madam I love you for millions of causes and you shall find it so if you
p'ease in troth dear Lady


I Will try him a little.


And I Will try thee I Will hold thee a wager ere I have done with thee.


But Sir, you have been a very deboist Gentleman I hear.


By what name pray Madam.


Truly Sir my memory is none of the best I have forgotten.


So I believe: pray withal forget what you have heard and you shall hear no
more of it, and upon that promise, come shall we agree


To what?


To do as we would be done unto.


How Is that.


I could show you Madam, with your good likeing.


Some other time I presume Sir will serve.


Nay no more Courtship if you love me Madam.

O Cupid the Bow-man, I am not thy foe man,
For I love this woman as well as I know man,
And therefore I pray thee with mischief to stay me,
And quickly to lay me in bed with this Lady.

What call you this pray*


It Is my imploration Madam.


You are very fluent, it is mere flattery, they are most childish will believe
all that their Suitors say my most Poetical servant


Most obdurate Lady, was ever widow so hard to win, sure her late Husband got
not her Maidenhead she is so backward


Adeiu Sir.


Not yet sweet Lady.


Pray trouble me no more with your speeches,


O cruel reply to a Lovers suit!

how to dissemble a little if ever you felt this passions pain, if ever you
would pitied be your self, or if you know that love has power to kill,
commiserate a heart so swelled with love for you, that it will quickly break if
you deny the justice of my request, and if you are resolved to remain
Inexbrable, I wish my Fortune yours, and if ever you love you may be served so


I am but a Woman and these words would move a stupid rock to pity, Sir I can
resist no longer, your tongue has magic in it, you have overcome me and enjoy
your Conquest. But first your Name


Frankheart.


And mine Lovefree: then thou Frankheart takes mes Lovefree, without any
farther Ceremony


A match, and one thing more I Will promise

My love to thee shall constant be and pure,


Let us to bed then and the bargains sure.

So this plot has hit right and I shall find,

Riches enough to poise a troubled mind.
NOw both in mind and form I am a perfect Witch, what hitherto I have done has
spread my fame far wider then it is, so that those who before looked upon me as
a crack brained woman, now begin to admire me, and esteem my words as Oracles,
especially our English who only come to be resolved of what I know will come to
pass of which here comes a great one

Reverend Matron whose all knowing skill our Country admires, part of which for
my own interest I humbly come to crave


Come near Abbot of Beverley, you are not so much disguised but the Fox may be
seen through the sheeps skin


She knows me upon my life a witch!


It Is not those Clothes makes you a Lay person, no more then a long gown makes
any man a Lawyer, please you to sit you shall not go away unsatisfied of what
you desire


I fear the downfall of our Abbeys, but ere I know my doom, accept this sacred
Relic lately come from Rome, a sure preservative against all troubles and
temptations


O your Testimony is needless to the wise, of which I thus prophecy.

When the Cow does ride the Bull
Then Priest beware thy skull!
And when the lower shrubs do fall,
The great tree quickly follow shall.
The Mitred Peacoks lofty pride,
Shall to his master be a guide.
The poor shall grive to see that day
And who did feast must fast and pray.
Fate so decrees their overthrow,
Riches bring Pride and Pride brings woe?

This is omminous and touches State, thy insolence must be corrected.


There Is none that's wise will say so
They that a Prophecy of me require
Shall know the Truth though not to their desire
Construe it how you please, so I leave you.

I fear she does presage too true, but ere I harbor such a thought of my own
downfall I Will cry vindicte on the witch that first induced me to it

Then prophesing Shipton know
Beverleys great Abbot is thy Foe
And does protest as he renounces sin,
To null thy witchcraft ere sun set again.

BUt you must be sure to swear point blanck.


O through an inch board Sir, lie and swear to it, it is the least thing of an
hundred, besides what is it Beggars wont do for Money


Very good but Mum, here comes the Justice and the witch.


Here our Officer has brought the party our warrant did command, Now say what
you can aleadge against her and let her answer for her self


Which shall be nothing


I say Sir she is a witch, and hope to prove it here by testimony.


Well declare what can any of you testify against her.


Sir an't please your Worship I have known her ever since she was a Totterdas
slut of fifteen, and she always threatened desperate things


Pish this is but talk, can any of you prove what you surmised for the ground
of your warrant that she is a witch


I now to the probat, speak what you can.


Ant please your worship I can safely take my corporal oath that she is a --


Out Rustic are you not ashamed to sneze in the Justices face?


Ant please your Worship I dare take my oath too that she is a --


More impudence! this will ruin me.


Ant please your good Worship to take our oaths, and we will confidently swear
she is a --


Divilish conspiracy! an Oath sticks in each throat and none can gulp it out.


Pray Sir what was your meaning to bring these Mechanics here to deride me?


No Sir but --


But what? know Sir I take it for an affront put upon me, for which these your
Testimonials shall all find severe punishment thus to upbraid justice, but
first say woman are you guilty of what they accuse you off or no


No right worshipful Sir, and here I do defy what all of them out of malice
have most disgracefully termed me


Once more speak you, or any, or all of you, can you contradict her, can you
prove her a Witch


Yes an't please we can all swear she is a


Out impudent Cattle: Clark drive them in, and then make each persons Min^^mus
to the County Goal, to answer to two Indictments. The one for upbraiding and
derideing me a Justice of Peace in Goram, the other for fasly accusing Mother
Shipton a woeman of good repute and conversation


O I am undone! pray Sir be merciful.


Reprobates away.
I shall be more severe to you if you stay.

A thousand thanks to your worship for being just to innocence,


It Is thy desert farewell.


Now have I not played a true Lovers part*


Thou have.


Fear not these by blows

Dread not to meddle with concerns of State,
Guarded by Fins thou needst not fear thy Fate.

I Am sorry and yet I cannot choose to laugh at my poor friend Moneylacks
misfortune: he loves, he loves honesty, nay my Sister too, and yet I blame him:
O that men in this world should be wrapped up in such dotage and stupidity to
what end? where is their aim? would any man be an Epicure? can he boast
himself so without the sense of variety! would he be a Philosopher? can he
imagine to find the stone by beating on one experiment? would he be a Scholar
and never turn over a new leaf: O ignorance inexpressible! of which I thank my
stars I am but little guilty off: the best of knowledge is experience. A man
may guess at many things, but when he has found them experimentally he is
confident, so say I, I thought my new provided widow was much enriched, and
now I have found it true, nay my pocket does pronounce it is verity it self

And now having got a second to my Knight, I hope I shall cross the Proverb And
between two stools sit sure

The next plot, Moneylack's contrived for thee!
Then thou must play the cunning man for me.
Old crafty Whore-hound look well to thy hits
When friends are faulty Shiftwel finds his wits.
Well was ever Heart so just with Avarice as is the old dotard my Father, who
at the approaching of winter must undauntedly expect to kick up his heels, and
yet to want the charity of crossing my hand with one small mite of Silver, this
is cold comfort to carry to my friend, and yet I must return to him: but now I
think on it Father since thou art so unkind to give me nothing, i will be so civil
to find a means to know when I shall have all, i am Heir though a wild one:
hereabouts lives the good old Mother Shipton, she is wise they say and can
presage prittily: this is the door sure i will knock

Your business Sir.


Sweetheart is the good Mother Shipton within.


But not at leisure as yet, you impart the occasion of your coming to me Sir, I
am her secret servant


Why then prithe do know Sir Habbakuk Holdfast of this County.


Yes an ancient Gentleman, much diseased and lives nere Pomfret.


The very same.


And what of him?


Why prithe ask thy Mistress how long she thinks it is possible for him to live.


See where she comes.


Sir I know the party you enqui e off, and concerning whom I thus Prophecy.

The Grave provided has a room
For his old age: His hour is come.
So I leave you.


So sweet heart thank thy Mistress.


Nay but pray Sir stay, if you forget to open your purse, I shall not forget to
open my mouth: do you think I can live with thanks? the Belly requires meat,
and the back clothing, thank you quoth he, marry come up


Prithee be not so hot, there is for thee.


Well I hope thanks will suffice you Sir, though it would not me, so farewell
Sir


Flesh I have given her half my stock, I am poor and yet if I have nere so
little I cannot forbear to be liberal: well Gentillity spiced with Poverty is
the worst accomplishment a Gallant of this Age, can be invested with: but to
the repetition of the Prophecy

The Grave provided has a Room,
For his old Age, his hour is come.
Heaven send the time: now with a heart fraughted with joy.

I Will to my Swagger and to him express,
The election of my future happiness.

FAith her disposition is most strange.


'Twas easier for to spurn the Cyclops Anvil down, and kick it into Attomes in
the Air then to obtain her love


O think not so.


Have I not cause?


At last after a constant and heard pursuit she may be wone.


Could I but hope so much, did all the Stars malignant Influences threaten Fate
opposite to my happiness, I would not deem them worthy of my observation, but
persevere till I obtained or fell


Conjecture still the best.


It Is easier to advice then to perform.


In these times young Ladies for a while do mantle their affection in dislike,
let not an ignorance of Virgins wills disturb thy breast with weak despair


See and exalt your eyes to happiness.


Maria and her Maid, I see a Lute: let us escape the light and it is likely we
shall hear her sing


Now give it me, is it in tune?


Yes Madam.


Forbear a while to play upon the spheers ye servants to the Deities, the Gods
will blame you if you keep the air of her all ravishing Harmony from their ears


Now have you heard her resolution.


That she disguizes, not her love you mean.


True and I am most miserable!


But see here she is all alone: now speak to her I Will withdraw and pray for your
success


Thanks good friend: hail Natures most perfect work, and the continual Idea of
my admyring Soul! however your poor Adorer Lady with a gracious look of your
beloved eyes


Alas your smile Sir is in vain, for in short, if you will give me leave, I call
to witness every particular instance, and tends to any Christians happiness,
that I will never enter into Marriage: and for your saying you must dye for me,
I hold it but a common complement of idle Lovers, and therefore wish you so
much happiness to live without me


O be not so unmerciful! had your Mother fairest Lady, Inexorable been, you had
not been, nor those crimson Roses ever spread upon your lovely cheeks: has
Nature liberally heaped the rairest perfections she could give Mortality to no
end? surely no; as you are a daughter of a beauteous Mother, she being dead,
you enrich the world unto you by your issue. Be not so cruel then, my fair
Maria, let not your tongue degenerate from your form


Sir you have heard me speak what I intend.


Be not a Tygress Lady.


Sir I must leave you, and leave you this humor, I respect you as you are a
Gentleman of my acquaintance, but if any more you trouble me with your Court
ship I shall utterly have you: so farewell


Does a fair face presage a cruel heart! Nature is grown decrepit sure, and all
things sublunary err against her rule of order

This is my fate, the fates I cannot prevent.
And till the end I know not their intent.

What is she still obdurate?


Beyond expression!


Yet let not these doubt puzzle you, you will be happy, and enjoy her, I am
confident you will: this is a common custom in young hearts


But this is a fixed Star.


Fixed in your heart it seems, but otherwise I doubt it, herefore in the end
doubt not you of your desire


You have stirred a feeble releif within me, friend that my dear Maria may be
warm and I will nourish it to some height


A necessa^y none must want which do
Desire fruition of those whom they woe.

CAptain you promised me a new Gown and have broke your word I desire therefore
to be acquitted your company


Pretty Pris. my Tennants are slow in paying their Rents I had not failed thee
else, but thou art very fine as you are


That Is without thanks to you, it is no cost of yours: I am beholding to a
better friend for it


But in truth Captain you must become more liberal to my Daughter for the
future


What do you think I Will venture my reputation for your Oaths, flattering words
and a little foolish pleasure


No indeed she must be maintained with other Materials: If she goes not fine
and gallant, she must bid farewell for ever to all hollidayes: the Honorable
and right Worshipful will not care for her embraces then


Are you against me too Mother? I thought you had had a greater kindness for me
then so


Indeed Captain you know I have much respected you: but you must think of
providing better for my Girl


I love thee, give me thy hand, and though I never made use of my Credit in
that kind, i will vow before my Mother i will take thee up a new Gown to morrow


Perform't and then you see Priscilla wi'l requite your kindness.


Then we are agreed, i will do it, now will I joak with my reverend Bawd a
little. My wonderful old Mother methinks you are grown merry of the sudden,
well is there any woman in Europe that can remember the building of the
Capitol, I dare pronounce it is you: would I had as much money as you have spent
in Almanacks since you could make use of them, I should be as rich as the grand
Govenour of a province


Well well Captain though you make a mock of my age, you would be glad to live
so long your self


There is but small hopes to imagine he will ever arrive to that Antiquity, his
debauchness will shorten his days, besides he is so quarrelsome I wonder he has
lived till now


Pish you prate, but is supper ready Mother.


Yes but we must stay for Esquire Hairbrain.


Will he be here?


Yes, and his friend Mr, Swagger.


Long looked for comes at last, Mr. Hairbrain your welcome


Thanks my dear Pris.


Mr. Swaggar you are welcome too.


Mother your daughter looks exceeding well methinks.


Venus be praised she needs no art of painting, her face always wears its
native colors


Paint out upon it, I should be loath to dawb my face with ointment.


But many of as good features, have not so nice a stomach.


I credit you, and have heard many rail against it as if they scorned to
adulterate their faces


You women no dissemblers are, but he that can live without you is a happy man.


But we trifle time, Mother lead way we will follow come Swagger within we shall
find a Mistress for thee


My Mother has a score or two at your service.


Thanks my fair Priscilla.


Well I must expect little enjoyment of dear Pris. while Hairbrain's here,
would I could win her affection to my self I would carry her far enough out of
all their reaches. She is Proxrots only child and she is rich

She may turn honest after she is a wife.
However money makes a happy life.

SEe this Letter will ease the heat of my troubled friend, and with more spirit
make him enact what I must desire him to perform to the life: It Is now high
time to place my Engine, and indeed to work it, Sir Oliver keeps close to his
study -- it is to no good intent

And I must watch his cunning to prevent

I Will strait to Moneylack and put my design in execution.

But see ye how fortunately he comes, my dear friend read that and then judge
of my prevalency with Maria

Sir having received a particular account of your worth and quality I am sorry
I have so long repaid your affection to me with disdain. I would not have you
triumph that I have so recollected my self, nor yet despair in any thing to the
contrary, for at present I can only satisfy you that I esteem you as an
accomplished Gentleman

Maria.

Is this her own hand.

Is this mine? I am sorry you guess my friendships to be flattery.


No more, I credit you, and by this means inspired a second breath into a
heartless Lover, it is beyond the reach of Oratory to declare thy gratitude. Nay
the well wishes of your friend have the same power to implore the like success
in all your own concerns


You are very bountiful, but now I must make bold to employ you in a business
wherein if you fail to be either secret or diligent 'twill be my utter ruin


Then if I be may the destruction fall upon my head, declare.


This it is, when the gossiping was, after dinner steping into the garden I
espied Sir Oliver murmuring to himself, and thinking it to be no goodness;
squatted under a bush and heard the Rogues design, very speedily of leaving my
wife and returning to his own and with her to remain till death them depart,
after he was gone I found (...) Letter (which he had dropped) which was to be
sent to his wife with (...) great imploration for pardon for former errors,
and protestations of ^n^ire love upon a favorable acceptance. Now to put an
obstacle to his intent, I would have you in a Sergeants habit, go and arrest
him at my suit upon two actions, one of Trespass, and the other of Battery,
(for I Am sure he has battered my wife) then threaten to carry him to the
Counter, and in the interim i will come and make up the business; and assure thee
Maria in the bargain. Time and place to meet with him you shall receive in a
note from me this even


Then if I fail to do it to the life call me Hypocrite.


Enough, farewell for the present.

Now for my widow.


REfuse my Mistress health, it is a crime which nothing but his death shall
expiate have I been ever his continual friend, and am I slighted thus, i will
raise all the dreadful furies from the infernal shades to stigmatize him full
of my revenge


Come, come, I Will have no quarrels in my house.


Mum Impudence! I Will meet his fury.


How now Hag, can you hinder quarrels in a Bawdy House.


If you can, you have more power then a Constable, but let my entreaties beg a
reconcilement


They are in vain and do but exasperate the prosecution of my just revenge
advance Sir


Stay beast unworthy of the name of man, much less unworthy thy of the name of
Friend, first peruse this letter and then I shall allay the seeming confidence
you have in your own valor


Of what moment is extravagancy, or to what end serves a riotus life, seeing
both the one and the other are subject to vicissitude and ready to yield at the
least puff of wind that blows from a conatry shore! O my disobedience! To
forsake the intern love of a Parent for the fruition of thy lascivious company!
where is my fathers golden Crop, I should have reaped? given to my Uncle whose
love is (...) cold to me as death it self. Now hell hound do thou sec unto
what distress by thy allusions I am now driven too, read there how my misery is
characted; revenge is sweet. Advance therefore for I am resolved to send thy
base polluted soul into the flames of Phlegeton

Nay Hairbrain prithee let me persuade thee.


And Swagger let me persuade thee.

3. And Gentlemen pray let me persuade you both.


I expected a more familiar way of scuffling then this.


I thought each man with his mate would fight
Battails not full of danger but delight.

Soft kisses, sweet embraces, and such sport
As often's used in the Venerial Court.

Out Whores trouble me not.


Methinks I find a sudden alteration within me, affection tha^ even now was so
powerful, is of the sudden turned to utter hate, and my heart for bringing
forth any fruits of love to Priscilla is as barren

The sand that lies on the sea shore.
I will embrace that love that hates a whore.

Well Gentlemen if you are so mute or mad I know not which nor I don't care
whether, we will be so civil to leave you, my Lady will find other Gallants to
be more gently embraced by, so farewell ha, ha, ha


Now Sir here take my sword and make a passage for my so^ that it may leave so
vile a habitation as this body


No here take mine and do me that courtesy,

-- For length of life to me,
Is but the product of more mirsery.

Pray Gentlemen without being thought too rude, may I desire to know the cause
of your Agrieveance


Then know Sir, to this Gentleman my friend bey on expression

-- I have been too rude,
I Am guilty of the sin ingratitude.
By my persuasions to lead an Extravagant life, he has lately lo^ a fair
estate, and on his fathers death bed merited his curses: for which I thus fall
his sacrifice


For heaven sake forbear: so much a fresh is my love kindle that I have both
forgotten nay and forgiven all, your confession to me, since all is past
recovery, is a sufficient satisfaction


Is this not policy to delay my death?


By all that's good it is not if you dare credit me.


You may be confident I will.


Then let all pass, we must now join prudence to our poverty, and by a serious
life regain the loss of virtue


With a heart as full of holy ardencie as those that devoutly implore zealous
mercies from their Saints, or as votaries from their Goddesses


Pray may a third man intervene that has not over virtuously inclined himself
and make a joint resolution with you for repentance


With all our hearts, but what is this.


Hell take Despair it shall never enter into my breast.


Nor mine.


Nor mine but see another apparition!


Hope thee I embrace, and friends let join hand and hearts in the height of
sorrow to have the greatest Hope, by some learned Author

-- We Will take advice
To embrace all virtue, and avoid all vice.

NOw am I experienced in the Magical Sciences, as much as ever was the famed
Medea or Circe. whose cuning has left a wonder to the world, so shall Shiptons
too! but to what end? what will the applausive clamor of the world benefit me,
when endless torments are my only comfort. But why do I suffer this
consideration? ha^ not my deeds merited the fruit of Hell? but how? Is it a sin
to covet riches when one suffers the contempt of the world by reason of
poverty? yes coveting ambitiously is execrable, but having a heart open to
embrace the delusions of the Devil, that, that alore is damnable! then
detestable Shipton look into the glass of thy infirmities, which are so many
they almost work a despair in me to cry peccavi^ yet have we not powers above
that, over hels prevalency are predominant? then will I cleave to them! but is
it not too late? sooner I confess would have been better! but surely a heart
penitentially inclined is not contemptible! then Devil look to thy self, thou
think I am thine, but thou shall find ere long thou art deceived. From the

And all thy Hellish Sciences I now regret,
Heaven will forgive if Hell I do forget.
HA, ha, ha, how I laugh at a poor crew of simple sinners who pursue temptation
more then it does them: who will scruple to swear dam me, since it is Allamode?
and who will avoid living vitiously admirable in this world though they
purchase Hell in the next? witness poor Shipton whose Name echoes out
admiration, to whom I have been a small attendant, but for no small wages, I
serve for souls but here she comes

Ha! here is my soul catcher! now all goodness be my assistance we'ome my
Radamon, thou art come just in the nick to accomplish an earnest request I have
too thee


Name it and it is granted.


Do It and i will confirm thou art a miraculous Devil! by all the Hellish
conspiracy thou ere wast master of, I do conjure thee to empty the Sea and make
me sole commandress of all the riches therein lie expanded


Impudent Witch! what has in joined thee to that arrogance to desire that which
all the power Hell could ever boast off never was able yet to grant


So his nonperformance of

This shall be my plea: why Radamon go to the sum of our contract art thou
not my servant


Yes I have been but now come in my Masters name to command thy soul.


My soul, ha, ha, ha!


Yes thy Soul witch do laugh.


Yes and does defy thee, know vaunting Devil by hells instigation I have
hitherto lead a vicious life I have now found out the way to virtue, which to
follow I am so undeterminably inclined, that no temptations shall withdraw me
from the perseverance of so good a resolution


Conceited woman how do thou flatter thy self with impossibilities: consider
thy innumerable frailties, consider thy daily practice of Murder, Witchcraft,
fatal Prophesies and what not that has merited hells endless torments: consider
these rightly, and thou will find they are so pondrous they will weigh down the
thoughts of any true felicity


Delude me no more, begone and tell thy Master, Shipton walks in a path will
make her truly happy by avoiding Hell


Thou lie, thou art mine, resign thy self to me and that presently or i will
raise hels fiery King himself withal his dreadful furies to drag thee to his
ever burning palace


Do, I dread them not.


Junx elke tu tenon Emon potidoma on Andra.


The cause of this great help thou craves?


See where she stands with such audacity Hell cannot show the like precedent.


Have you expressed our commands.


Yes and she scorns them.


Shipton thou art mine.


Yes and you can take me.


Seize on her straight.


What are you grown feeble? i will join my strength!


What preservative has she got against our power?


Too sure she is sheilded by those powers above, to which ours is impotent!


We must use other means Shipton farewell,
Pluto still hopes to see thee hang in Hell.

I must now then conclude this to be the last attempt, still, still, protect me
y

-- Powers Celestial and i will impart,
Your glorious Mercy with a thankful heart.

Now David how think thou of my cunning.


Very well truly Sir, you have a brain i will, say that for you.


Poor Shiftwel it troubles me though. O me what a brave man he was, no meeting
at the Horse race, Cocking, Hunting, Shooting or Fowling at which Shiftwel was
not a principal Gamester, and companion for the Nobility


I Sir he has paid deer for those follies, and it is but justice that such as
soar above their pitch, and will not be warned by his example should like him
share in the miseries that wait upon it


Thou say right David, and I in pity have for these few years lent him a
helping hand to raise his fortunes, but now for my own self interest sake I
must leave him, therefore David run and fetch my boots and bring them to the
Inn, i will haste before


I am gone Sir.


Bless me, sure that is my old Knight that creeps along so or my eyesight
fails me


I arrest you Sir, by the name of Sir Oliver Whorehound.


Ha! it is he and arrested. I must down and know the event.


Arrest me Sir at whose suit?


At Mr. Shiftwells suit upon two actions, with two or three executions which
shall grind you to powder when I have you in the Counter


At Mr. Shiftwells suite, thou do belie him Varlet, he I dare lay will weep
when he here is on it


Yes like a Millstone.


See where he comes you had best tell him so.

Nephew Shiftwel you are come most opportunely to free me from this Band^g. I
know you gave no way to it nor had you any reason so to do


Bless me who do I see; Shiftwell is thy Name? O deceitful man!


Are you a Sergeant acquainted with the danger of a rescue, yet stand here
prating in the open streets, the Counters sure a safer place to parley in


Your reason for this disgrace to me?


It Is but justice in me. The reason you shall know hereafter.


Pray here me speak.


Whilst I like the adder stop my ears, or did I listen, though you spoke with
the tongue of Angels I am not to be altered


Pray make me sensible of the offense I have done, if it be any, and I will
make the best of my estate to end the difference


How does my heart now pant bewteen Hope and fear, to know the period of this
business


He show you some mercy which is this. That I will not torure you with false
hopes, but make you know what you shall trust too: I have seized upon your
estate already, yet that shall not suff^ therefore Sergeant do your duty: yet
stay Sir Oliver, I have conditions to propose, upon which I Will free you


Sir I have been at the Inn and finding you not there came back to look you.


My journies stopped now David, Mr Shiftwell you may propose but I imagine the
next Tavern, or some other place might be more convenient


With all my heart lets to the next Tavern, go send for two or three friends
and discourse of it there at large


Ha! a Sergeant on my masters back, Shiftwel has napt him, now all will out as
i will go hear


Now is my shame as evident as day light, O unfortunate woman! that I should
have the ill-luck above all other men to meet with him, that I fear I shall
find more then an honest man: but come what will, I must follow and in my
Knights cause outlook the world with confidence


Now Scrievener read the propositions.


That for the injury designed to Mr. Shiftwell you will freely give him a
hundred pounds yearly during his life, and after his decease to Maria


Ha! to Maria, I cannot conceive the reason, but i will be silenced till the future.


Secondly to make Mr. Shiftwels wife jointure a hundred pounds per annum more
during her life, and lastly to keep his wife and family twelve years, and if
at the twelve years end you intend to leave them fairly to give a quarters
warning


Here Is one says no to that but the rest for your freedom Sir Oliver I must
consent too

Ha! my dear wife.


You have been a hopeful husband, but blame me not if I have paid you in your
coin


I am amazed.


Nay stare not Mr Frankfort that was pretended, you and I have been a little
better acquainted, but not with a thought that your wife and my husband were
such sure bedfellowe


Well then wife I hope you will pardon me.


I do and expect the same from you.


Well I have lost a good generous customer by the bargain, and (...) be
contented, but Sir Oliver you freely seal to these articles the last only
omitted by your wives in junction


Withal my heart, upon the giving me a bond for redelivery of my estate.


That I will, only one thing more remayns: that upon Maria's acceptance of the
person she affects for her husband, you will pay down the marriage portion in
your hands remaining


Most freely.


Then pray witness the sealing and delivery.


Now Sir Oliver what were have done we cannot undo, therefore Mr. Moneylace:
discover your self and accept my Sister Maria for your wife

And I accept him as my only happiness.


Dearest Lady you have raised me to a joy beyond my thoughts may heaven requite
you for your kindness, and I wear out my life to do you service


Bless me here are wonders in ridles.


Sir Oliver I must crave your pardon for my rudeness.


There is a general pardon granted, and now good wife lets see how our ends
will meet again


I accept thee freely.


Then we are all friends.


I arrest you Sir.


Arrest him Villain?


Pray Brother with bold a little, at whose suit?


At this Gentleman's.

Then I Will end all. My noble Uncle!


I have a request to take my security for this Gentleman's debt, he is become my
brother


Your Brother?


Even so sir, to morrow I Am to marry this Gentlewoman his sister: release him
therefore pray sir for your nephews sake


That I will Sergeant be gone I have satisfied you.


And pray Gentlemen pardon my ignorance of all these proceedings and Nephew I
wish you much happiness

I thank you Sir, come brother now to make all friends.


Now lets in and drink each others health in

Sack which the Gods did Nectar call,
So end our mirth in a high Festival.

TO be sure sir the next Nap she takes if I get not the jewel ab^ut her Neck
from her: I dare promise to give you your purse of gold again, and that would go
a little against my conscience


Be very vigilant and fail not, then i will make thee Mistres of all I have
promised thee


Especially for my having you sir for my Husband.


O I cannot avoid that, I love thee too well my pretty smug face,


I thank you sir.


But I may stay thee too long, thou may miss an oppotunity: fail not to meet
at the place I Have appointed thee


Truly sir I will not,


Sure this plot cannot fail, which that it may not

I Will to all my charming conspiraces Will bend,
Shipton thou will hardly shun Hell in the end.

Now let me consider of the preferment that will quickly fall upon me, must I
that have been obeysive to an old woman's humor become a Mistress of command:
must I that have scoulded, nay many times scufled for a penny, become Mistress
of a purse of Gold? must I that have many times stole out in an even to kiss
an Hostler, be embraced by a Gentleman, a handsome Gentleman; with a fine head
of hair, neat body, straight leg, nay and another pretty property worth all the
rest, and then thou art fitted for a Husband Abigal i will warrant thee. But I
have heard our next neighbor goody Belch often complain of her Husbands
beating her, but I says i will pummel my Gentleman if he beats me, but let me
see, I must find out a gate to carry out my Gentility, will this Gate do

No it sents too much of the serving maid, well then so

No I stretch out my belly too much and that needs not, for my Husband does
promise to get me with child quickly, and then e'faith my belly will stretch
out it self

O this then will serve


Ha! huswife is this your making haste when I send you of an errand, what purse
have you got there? and what fine Gentleman are you to have for your Husband


Pray Mistress be not angry and on my bended knees I will relate the story.


Cease that Ceremony and begin.


Why truly forsooth at the Corner of this field I met with a very Gallant
Gentleman who gave me this purse of gold, and promised to morrow morn to marry
me, if I would but steal that jewel about your Neck from you


Indeed forsooth, well open your purse and tell your gold.


O heaven Mistress it is all stones and dirt,


Yes and he that gave it thee a Devil, for none else would insinuate thee to
rob me of this jemne of my true happiness


A Devil! O how I find my fears increase.


Go in Girl i will follow and protect thee.


This was Radamons device: but arm me still ye powers devine that no Devils
instigation does betray me: protect me even now for I find a sudden slumber
seizes me


Ha! what is this a book? the cover bears the type of innocence, i will ok in it.

Shipton

In thy sorrows be not drowned
From above thou have mercy found:
Think not repentance comes too late
If it is unfeigned thou art fortunate!
And though the Devil does endeavor
To entrap thy sinful soul, yet never
Yield, but his attempt resist,
And he his suit will soon desist.
O endless comfort! now attempt what you can proud Devils, but ^s! what noise
is this

Well your business now? you see I do not quake
That ere while made you and your Furies shake.
We know thy power and thy magic skill, and for the entrease of the same, we
present thee with this paper wherein is a spell of Prophecy to fore tell of
what was, what is, and what is to come. In his paper there is another spell
powerful to command any spirit of w at nature soever


Well I accept your presents but spurn at your society, all your emptations are
airy and too weak to besiedge my fortyfied soul


Was ever Devil gull d so:

Well lets descend and all Hell shall howl
This full fortnight for loss of Shiptons soul.

So let them roar.

Whilst I do all their Hellish Acts despise
The higher powers make me truly wise.

NOw you have tasted of our homely cheer,
Pray tell us how you like it: was it dear?
Or else where lay the fault? pray gallants tell,
If It did displease it was ill, if not 'twas well,
But may the Ladies smile on it i am sure then,
'Twill be approved off by the Gentlemen!
So pleasing both we are in hopes we may
Expect your company another day.
IV'e escaped the Devil but I fear you most,
If your frowns appear poor Shiptons lost*
But now I look again, methinks I spy
A gentle pardon in each gracious eye.
Visit me oftener and in time you will see
Poor Shipton may deserve your plaudite.

