AT a New Play all Poets must tell news.
Ye'r welcome to the labor of a Muse;
Who does implore (and it is your pity worth
Your helping hands to bring her firstling forth,
And let me tell ye, it is most necessary
Since it is her first you act more kind and wary,
Should you be rough and harsh in what you do,
The brat might prove defective long of you.
S'lid then all is spoiled, your expectation crossed
The Muse discouraged and her labor lost.
Come, come, for once be kind and ruled by me
And let your smiles crown its Nativity.
We question not Lucina's help, if you
Vouchsafe her safe delivery 'twill do,
And that with Pomp and State, whilst ye are by
Your presence makes it a solemnity.
The beautys present blazing starr's appear
As good Omens to this our hemisphear.
Nor can we, whilst such luster they dispense,
Doubt of a favorable influence.
But I digress, the gravid Muse I left
Of all succor except bare hopes bereft.
She Is in the Midwives hands and much endures
And cannot be relieved; except by yours.


I See I Am Fortunes Favorite to the End
In a strange place to meet my dearest Friend!
But prithee tell me Ben. how has thy pollitick pate maintained thy Nobleness?
I am sure you needs must thrive, Since by your last Letter to me at Madrid I
was informed you have banished the Conceit of Marriage


O yes, I thank my Fate that fancy flew quickly, and ever since in your Art I
have been no small practitioner


But how did your Mistress Selina relish it? That Admirable Doxie!


Doxie indeed! whose lascivious life, had it been concealed till I had married
her, had ruined me for ever


What Man, the chaste, the virtuous Selina!


No the unchaste, vicious Selina! whom (after my Annual services of Adoration
to her Shrine, and unfeigned vows of being hers constant for ever) I found to
be as foul within, as I esteemed her fair without


Why this is fine ^ faith. By Jove Ben: I Will tell thee these women are just like
weather Cocks, that turn too and fro at every puff of wind: So they are as
fickle in settling their Love on any one man, as a Phanatick Parson's unwilling
to alter his Religion when he is forced to Conform or loose his Benefice


I have found it so.


It Is a remarkable observation, that any man that has eyes and ears must of
necessity credit it: but there are some such Buffs in this land, that will not
believe what their ears have heard, or eyes have seen: but take their Wives as
we do Conies to pen up, whilst every Dame to requite the kindness, will find a
convenience to tempt the next young Gallant that passes into her Chamber, and
there discharge the burden of her desire without the least consideration of
making her Husband a Cuckold


That Is most certain.


Most certain and you so certainly besotted as resolve to marry; I thought the
little practice you had made in my Art might have been a sufficient Emblem to
demonstrate all women's levity


Prithe no more often: I am as far from having a good thought of women's
constancy, as ever I was, and once you know I was your only scholar, had your
cunning ad ungues, (and if without boasting) can say I still retain it


Then let us plot and practice: this is a City affords good faces, we will
instantly go view it, you one way, I another: but be sure before you strike
search out the nature of the creature


Never sear it, I Will warrant thee boy I hit right.


That done you cannot miss entrance into any Venetian Dame, for my part I doubt
not my rogury will never fail getting me a Mistres, though it were in the Land
of Chastity


I confide something too in mine.


Come then lets to our Inn, there we will sever:
As thou have begun, good Fortune, help us ever!

WHat sudden alteration do I find,
That does so please and yet torment my mind!
I know no reason for it: there was nothing in the Masque last night but what
was pure and splendid

-- Ladies as fair
And beautiful as is the morning star!
Now I have pri d into secret Art,
That Ladies glittering Eyes can wound a heart!
I must to fair Ermenia a captive be,
I Am her Adorer, she my Deity!
But here she comes: she'es Beauties Paragon!

You have your answer Sir and may be gone.

Since Madam. I Am dismis'd so scornfully,
To move a change I must presumptious be,
Think on the good Eusames mis'ries, he
Who like a careful penitentiary,
Bedewes his bed with tears, as they are due
To discontent, and all for love of you!

Why Sir for me? he knows it is in vain
To hope Ermenias love to reobtain.
First let him change his coat of poverty,
To wealth and honor: and then think of me.

Let not your height contemn his humble state
But Saint like pity the unfortunate!
He once was high too, but in each degree
Where he did love, he loved with constancy!
Since first he loved you, to that love he is true,
Yet suffers Martyr-like for love of you.

I believe once he loved me well indeed,
And mine did equal his (if not exceed)
But I considred not the miseries
Of marriage then, which now I do despise,
A maiden life all others does excel:
Pray tell Eusames this, and so farewell.

Pray Ladystay: one request does remain.
He ask no more,

Then that you shall obtain.

She turns again, I doubt be will in the end
Make a deep interest in her for his friend!
But be it how it will, I Will overhear:
I am too lofty to be touched by fear.

Are you resolved always to live amaid?

I mentioned not how long but thus I said
A Maidens life excels all other lives:

But Maids contracted are as good as wives!

O me! she sounds!

That story in the ear
Has made her pride fall, and my spirit fear.

She breathes again,

Madam how are you now?

Well, but better had I made no vow
To poor Eusames: Florentio we will withdraw.

I Will follow Madam, your will is my law.
Ye powers of love and friendship crown the end
Of this design with comfort for my friend!

Great God of love, what mighty power unknown
Have thou now used to me, more then thy own?
It was thy conduct sure and thy design,
And not thy power alone that vanquished mine:
As a great Captain in the wars to his Name
Of every conquest gained, joins all the Fame,
Though 'twas not only by his power got
But by the Armies by his Conduct brought:
So when thy power could not do it alone
Thou then did lead her troops of virtues on?
And now too soon I feel by my surprise
Thou have not only darts but peircing eyes!
Then as thou art great and powerful be Just!
I am enforced to love, and love I must.
The news Captain, any Letters from the Army yet to his Highness?


Yes Sir last night.


Are the contents divulged?


Yes some two days since half our army was besmeared with blood, the other
half took flight, and the famed Carionil with some number of chief Commanders
were surrounded with a multitude of Enemies, and almost hopeless of ever seeing
Venice again: yet when they heard our noble General cry, fight, fight for Venice
till you dye, they with such vigor redoubled their blows, adding wounds to
wounds, blood to blood, dead to the dead, till by the favor of that potent
God, with whom it is to give the victory, they through the Multitude quickly
run their way, and after for that night sounded a retrea

And in the interim receiving a supply
Early next morn refac'd the enemy,
Whose Army in number doubled ours, but at the first onset with manly courage

-- We dispersed them quite,
Part we took prisoners, part we put to flight.
The rest lay gasping on the ground frustrate of future hope or remedy,

-- Few escaped alive.
Of lasts nights news this is a Narrative.

I joy we were so succesful in the end, though to our loss at first.


I could have gladly wished my self there, but that I was commanded to the
contrary


I credit you Captain, you have done your Country good service.


My Lord I must retire.


Farewell good Captain.

I know not what to think much less to do!
I am in the flames and now I must go through?
Why should I dote on one that is so mean?
But she that is lovely to love is a Queen!
Ermenia thee I love, thy love I crave
Which if my wealth and fame can gain I Will have!
I fear no rivals, i have a double fate,
Too wealthy for contempt, too high for hate!

Florentio what iv'e said i will do, provided he
Without contempt a constant Lover be.

Madam!
Be you as kind as he will constant prove
And make his joys as perfect as his love.
I dare protest by 'very Deity,
He Will never be guilty of inconstancy!

Then whi le I live i will love him: tell him this
Though many court me, yet my heart is his.

So I have prevailed and for joy could fly
To tell Eusames of my victory!
O may the god of love, as he is begun,
Unite these too contracted hearts in one!
See here he comes: i will stand aside
-- To know how his thoughts fixed are
Whether to hope or fear or to despair,
Or whether he will into a passion fall,
For i have a double joy to banish all.

How joyfully the birds with warbling notes
Salute the morning through their gentle throats!
But day no sooner does appear to me,
But I complain a fresh of misery
In love! imperious love!
Assist a wretched youth thou caused all this
And it is thy power alone can work my bliss!
I cannot, dare not hope my friend can be
So prevalent to regain her love to me.
She is grown high, and yet must higher grow,
While I, for love of her, must fall too low!

Stay, stay Eusames!
What struck dum with fear
Of the sad news you do expect to hear
From me?

(...) fear
It is too (...) for me to hear!

For love I moved, but she her love denied,
And having so resolved, she thus replied:
A Maiden-life all other lives excel,
Pray tell Eusames this, and so farewell:

Then love farewell for ever!
And though from all my joys I am betrayed
By thy resolve to live and dye a maid,
I will not wish that thou may live and dye
Such an unpittied, martyred one as I!

Be not so hasty: there remains behind
Asentence from her, you will esteem more kind
Then was the other Cruel!
-- While I live i will love him: tell him this
Though many court me, yet my heart is his.

O tantalize me not with hopes so vain!
Can she so hate, so quickly love again
As if she had her former scorn forgot?

If you can think me false, believe me not.

Then I must credit it, O how the joy
Of thy success my miseries destroy:
My heart's enlivened with a fresh relief,
And double Comforts do arise from grief!
So Palms pressed down, do ever rise the more,
And spices bruised smell sweeter then before.

There Is nothing now remains but your adress
To complete hers and your own happiness,
For if a Maidens vow was ever true
No doubt she loves as fervently as you.
You need no (...) since you know the way
Haste too her then, it is dangerous to delay.

I will, yet ere I go must recommend
A parcel of poor thanks to you my friend.

Spend no more time in complementing me,
My recompense is thy felicity.
Could thou enjoy Ermenia for thy Bride
I for my worthless pains was satisfied
But you loose time.

He that a loyal friendship does regard
Heaven with hapiness will him reward.

ANd how and how? prithee begin, how are all things at Court?


O right to a hair, as I could wish or desire, the Ladies very pleasant and
free, the Gallants very complacent and simple, out of which I have picked out
one to play upon, he is in quality and ability one of the chief, and as I take
it a very fine fool for our purpose


His Name?


Don Gonzetto, and for mirth to make up your Roguery, there is one Pego his man
is reported for the prittiest dreaming Puppy that Venice can boast off


Why then I perceive the Master and man are like to be finely handled if they
come into our ^tches, but how have contri'd it


O this great Don is very desperately in love with a young City Dame, and I
perceive by his clipped tongue he wants a good Orator


With a young City Dame?


So I was informed.


Good luck send it be the same I heard off, for now i will tell thee Ben. part of
my progress, I was no sooner got into the body of the City, but I was crep
into a crowd of acquaintance: Ladies by whole sale, and Citizens by Bakers
dozens, amongst which I think I have picked out two of the most precious Ningles
that the whole City affords: Fellows as rich as they are simple, and that I am
sure is beyond expression; the one is S. Don Aquinto a high and mighty
Mountebank who swears he has done many wonderful and remarkable cures, but if I
don't catch his coxcomb into a trap, that all his medicines shall never draw
him out, let him report me no man of my trade. His whole discourse be it where
it will, so there be any body to hear him, is of his cramp stage talk, of his
great Cures of the Uvula, the Choliac a passio, the Polippus, with the rest as
Morbus Gallicus etc. which is enough to tire a crew of patient Saints were they
his companions, but that he has this good faculty, when the reckoning is
called, his purse shall be sure to pay fort; the second is one Seignior
Cornelio a very comical Coffee-man, and such another Ignoramus, but that his
tougue does not so much betray his simpleness. But here is the point, these two
Coxcombs, are very passionately taken with two young Ladies, daughters to one
Avaritius a rich reported Userer, and in short by my discourse finding their
own weakness and my efficacy in Art Amandi very nobly retained me for their
Agent


There indeed you have got the start of me, but i will follow close.


Hark Ben. Let it be your care to bring Conzetto to our end of the Town among
my crew that we may tie them all of a not, and then we I so swing them! this
evening we shall be at Cornelioe I Coffee-house


Then there i will be sure to meet you with my Don.


Do so for as I remember I was also informed Avaritius had a lovely Niece too,
courted by many high Persons of which perhaps he may be one, and then our plot
lies in a lump and must needs go current


But have you yet seen any of these Ladies?


Yes, and they are as pretty Creatures as ever I see, fair and each has a
promising countenance of a very free disposition, the Mother of the two Sisters
was an English-woman. I have a plot for them both


But when will you put it in practice?


Forthwith, lets go visit them instantly: our (...) are suitable to the Mode,
our Persons proper, and for our tongues they need no tipping; but one thing
always observed Ben. let not our Roguery extend to any criminal fact, that may
merit the halter or the like, but tend only to a self interest: the

None will endeavor to condemn his Fate,
That plays the Rogue, and injures not the State.

SIR, I like you well, and be assured that all my powers shall be employed to
do you service


Ye'are truly generous.
And it is my happiness I (...) could hope for
After so many storms of adverse fortune
To relish safety in so still an harbor
And meet the favor of so good a Patron
Just in the nick of my despair. But Sir,
My future diligence and industry
In whatso're you use me, shall declare
How I can love and serve so good a Master.

Nobly spoken: accept me as your faithful friend.
My house is yours pray Sir be bold and welcome.

I shall now take the confidence to think
That all past troubles of my youth, were of purpose by fortune meant, to make
me relish no
These sweets more tartly.

Very likely;
And I must further add, that all her former kindnesses,
Did less oblidge than this fingle one
Of making me the object of your friendship.
But come Sir, will it please you take a dish of Coffee to digest the news of
the Diurnal


With all my heart! Sir I attend you: pray Sir --

'Twere better be absurd than, trouble some.

COrnelio.


(...) your word.


Here Is your Enemy Don Aquinto the Mountebank.


How!


Mum! take no notice till you meet occasion.


Enough,


Here a dish of Chaclates.


Of your best spanish.


You shall sir.


Well, and how goes (...) packquets, do the remedies go roundly off, ha'you
good takings, ha


Troth well*

I find the people free and much inclined to do themselves and me good.


This is he that strives to dam my trade by making strange speeches against
Coffee -- but I shall have something to say to his balderdash complication of
hard words presently -- are you for Coffee sir


No sir, the Berry is much degenerated from its proper virtue here in Venice by
an absurd commixture which renders it very unwholesome


Sir mine is as good as any's in Venice.


That may very easily be when there is none good at all.


It Is the property of fools to condemn what they understand not.


Of fools Sir?


Yes Sir of fools. He that is disgruntled at that Sir is a fool, -- I think
(...)


(...) Sir.


Now it works in faith.


Nay good Aquinto --


I, I, do kill me, you have no remedy against an hemp halter I hope: there I
^pt him again


Nay pray sir be p^ed -- see here comes strangers


Sir I have sold Coffee this twenty years and have lived a man of reputation.


What man of (...) would ben^ with such a Rascal, that has lived upon parched
beans, and boild water these twenty year by his own confession


Come pray Gentlemen let us moderate the business.


A man of honor, a pitiful Mountebanck, a dull decoying Fortune Tellers, an
impudent close-bugete'd imposter, one that gets his living merely by choking
the multitude with hard words, and a little dirty dogs-turd compounded with a
strange conjuring charm, Hyperbolloticon-bombon or the like? a man of honor?
ha, ha, ha. That excellent in faith


ha, ha, ha.


Ye shall but here, pray give me leave, this is he that cures all diseases,
and performs all Chyrurgical operations. He dexterously coucheth the cataract
or suffusion, helps all rheumes, specks, Oungula or the nail in the eyes,
dimness, pearls, weakness. He has the best remedies in the world for all pains,
sickness Megrum Vertigo or the dissiness of the head he cuts and cures cancers,
wens, sore-breasts noli me tangere, as also Morbus gallicus, or the French POX,
(in great letters) running o'th reins, and in a word all diseases and
distempers incident to the body of man woman or child be it boy or girl


ha, ha, ha ha.


(...)


(...)


(...)


(...)


ha, ha, ha.


(...)


(...) in some, but in you they are (...)


(...), ha, ha, ha.


(...) you and I have (...) a progress in your love with fair (...) a plot to
make ye happy


With (...) shall we finish and come to the purpose?


We are not far off -- (...)


Well (...) must needs be time.


(...) stay.


I will.


(...) to pay, take money.


(...).


(...) I shall be even with (...) incivilities.


(...)


Farewell sir


A man of honor, farewell Dr. Distaff belonging to the wheel of Fortune.


I Will be with you (...) prefixed without fail.


Your servant sir.


Welcome Gent^

So (...) no way you say but by this (...) and her fathers consent?


No, for put case she loves, as I dare warrant she does yet there must be
something closly acted, that may make it sure, and not when we have brought our
building to the height to be ruined with a puff


Well I am resolved to spend all my estate in contrivances but I will have my
mind


And I mine --

But come lets to the Tavern, and there we will plot to accomplish all.


Shall we, a match then come on,


WHat stories are these I hear, Lucibella, ha what are they Lucibella? speak
Clara, concerning two Youngsters. that were tampering to speak with you under
the notion of business? what say you


Only two young Gentlemen that desire your leave to try our wits by spending an
hour in discourse with us now and then


S'lid i will h'none of that, if ye have a mind to husbands ye shall love and like
where I please or i will know why not


That will be pretty in faith, so we shall couple with two old Citizens, that
are already grown out of fashion for want of the rudiments of Gentility in
their youth, together with two much brooding over their books and bags in their
counting house


Come come I have a couple of Husbands for ye, grave and rich; and have ordered
them to come to day upon a likeing, in the mean time trick yourselves up
handsomely and prepare to entertain them with discretion


S'lid lets baulk the old man, stand close


Well I must straight to the Exchange, where possibly I may meet them and
conduct 'em hither


Save ye Ladies! we are somewhat bold to interupt your privacies.


But we hope to find an easy pardon.


That Is easily granted Gentlemen.


No doubt on it.


I durst have thought as much ere I came in.


A very pretty humor; their both handsome men, pray heaven I misconster not
their errand


Madam so strange a curiosity has urged me to this boldness, I found it vain
to resist: And to be plain we came with a resolution to love and serve you;
smile on me? Madam, I Am yours body and soul


Very blunt and pathetical!


Troth I see I must be fain to put my self forward, Sir methinks you might be
doing


Doing Madam?


Yes doing something.


Faith any thing with you Madam.


Ha ha ha, now he comes on two fast:


Now am I so mad with love, that by my virginity, I shall never be sober till
you quit me of that oath


Then you may chance to dye raving.


Say you so? If I do, I am resolved my Ghost shall walk and haunt you till it
fright you into the same condition


How shall I know that?


Now I think on it my affection's in expressable.


Well excused however.


Come what say ye, shall we make a mad match on it


As how I pray?


Why, make a resolution to love one another, reciprocally in spite of Fate and
the malice of the Devil


Suppose I make this blind covenant, and you or I after we have feasted our
appetites with those delights, may chance to clog our stomachs, and then turn
to neglect, and fail in your appointed Articles, what shall be the forfeit for
every such default


Why faith on your side to be tongue tied, and lie alone.


Good, and on yours -- Cuckoldome, or so.


Agreed in faith.


In faith agreed.


One denial more, and by the love I bear you, which is as safe and sound as any
roach, i will turn Astronomer and hate all women in general


Well, hanged for once i will make a blind bargain on it and buy a pig in a poke?


And how goes squares Ben.


Faith, very roundly! we have made a short cut on it.


So, so, then we will be merry, laugh and lie down, dance and sing in spite of
the old man's opposition, but first lets sing, what say ye Ladies


What you please.


I, I, come come, we will help to make a Chorus.


What need we use many beseeches
Or trouble our brain with long speeches.
If we love it is enough
Hang Poetical stuff
As the rule of Honesty teaches

Hang Poetical stuff
As the rule of honesty teaches.
Why should we stand whining like fools
Or woe by platonical rules
If they love we will repay't
If not let 'em say it
What need they the help of the Schools.
etc.
But this must be won by Romances
And that by verse and fine dances
A third does delight
In a song yet at night.
You must crack a string which she fancies.
etc.
This must be extolled to the sky;
That you can get, do but flatter and lie.
But that Ladi's for me
That loves fine and free
As real and ready as I.

That loves fine and free
As real and ready as I.

I protest a very pleasant one.


Of your own composure I suppose.


An abstract drawn from our humor and disposition, Madam.


It Is well ayr'd too.


You jeer Madam.


You mistake Sir.


Madam Lucibella your Father's coming down street with two Gentlemen homeward.


Upon my life Aquinto the Mountebank and Cornelio the Coffee-man, what shall's
do Ben


Let 'm come weel not bauk them weel wheedle them into an opinion that we were
acting in their behalf aforehand that they might be entertained with more
familiarity and greater courtesy


And for the old Man, Ladies with your leaves we will undertake to allay his
pettish humor


Well Gentlemen use your own discretion.


And you yours with your new Suitors.


Sir, they enter.


Come Daughters -- how? -- here is a new trick in faith -- Pray Gentlemen what
acquaintance have you here


O Sir,


O me no O's sir, ye owe me nothing sir.


But pray sir.


Pray me no prays sir, pray to God if -- ye'are so minded sir, Pray sir quoth A
--


S'lid sir ye are a man of the perversest humor, that ever I met since I
sucked milk; what are you sir, that you will neither be spoken too nor give an
Answer


One would ha'thought your age and long experience should have taught you more
civility to strangers, then thus to tyrannize, though in your own house


You say well sir.


However they come to know it, they have nick't his humor right, The old man's
chollar falls


Now sir ye'are something more a man --


What then? speak.


Why pray sir.


Pray sir again?


-- Have but a little patience and i will tell you the whole story. --


Story? that were fine in faith, do I stand here to hear stories? Sir tell me
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth


Why so ye shall if you will but lend an ear --


No Sir i will lend neither of my ears.


Then keep 'em till the Pillory claims it own.


Nick, Nick.


Excellent!


I see he is incapable of any civil society, i will e'ne rant him, Ben. observe my
style


Enough, proceed.


Venerable Sir, I shall take my leave -- hark ye sir, I shall have something to
say to ye in some other place, for extortion and bribery the two damned sins 'oth
age


You may remember sir the defference between you and young Mr. Lavish
concerning a morgage, where you had like to have screwed him to part with one
half of his Estate to secure the other


And then to stop his mouth compounded with him for half in half.


Gentlemen --


Nay this is not all.


Remember sir how ye abused his Higness bounty, which was to be distributed
amongst six Justice of Peace for their good service ith sickness time, when you
with your two comrades, got it into your own hands, you cast out the other
three Justices and proved your own carvers


How --


Nay sir there is a Petition like to be exhibited by Justice Gizard and the
other two injured parties, 'twas a high indignity, and his Highness must know
it


It Is fit he should by this light.


Well Gentlemen, I must withdraw, I beg your pardons -- O my sad heart, what to
do, what to do


Is he gone?


I Will warrant you for ever returning till we are gone.


We netled his Justice-ship in faith.

What news now.


Here Is Don Aquinto and Cornelio are very desirous to see you Ladies.


Prithee entertain 'em a while ith Hall and show them the fine pictures. Ladies
these are the men whose spokesmen we are to represent, and first Don Aquinto
the mountebank, is one who spends all his estate besides his little brains in
inventing hard words for sublime Courtship and employing others to take
presidents out of the greatest wits in Christendom for that purpose


The other in his expression so low and blunt, that an hour with him is an
absolute divertisment


Hark is not that their tread? --


Doubtless, let us retire Ladies for fear of maring your pastime.


Pray do if you please, behind the Arras away, away,


I have heard of Cherubins and Seraphins, but never saw I Angels clothed in
flesh before


A high sublime conceit.


Pox 'twas a complement an Age ago made to two Persons of Honor by a studient
of Cajus Col. an intimate friend of mine


Mrs. Clara, let me not live to fill one dish of Coffee more, but dye like a
fool suddenly without making my will if I don't love ye -- most heartily


Thank ye, thank ye.


All the Celestial beauties of the heavens, compounded in one only object,
could not more afflict and press these weaker optics which (as those lesser
lights called stars, do vanish and disappear at Phoebus rising glory) are as it
were obscured by your too glorious aspect


Methinks you should have done well to have brought a preservative against
weakness of eyes along with you knowing what a powerful object they were to
encounter


True Madam, but men that are employed about affairs beyond the moon, cannot
stoop to consider matters subluminary; those men whose larger souls still aim
at things immortal, know not how to condescend to converse with inferial
mortality


I Madam, you may say what you please, but I protest my heart is as full of
love, as a Church bucketfull of water


Good, or as an empty oystershel's full of brains.


What you please Madam.


You much oblidge me Sir
And I could wish ye had spent your Ceraphick courtship.
On a more worthy and deserving object.

Pardon me Madam,
I must not bear you set so low an estimate
On your high merit: I must be bold
To rectify your judgment, and inform you
Of a mistake; that none but your fair self
Durst have committed without apparent (...),
Namely that you should seem to intimate
Your matchless self, excelled by any she
How beauteous soever. I could (...) over
The various features of all foreign beauties
English, Italian, French and Dutch
Such vast experience has much travel taught me
With the Fashions, Customs, Laws, con^ions
Allowed and ratified to each of these:
And yet all these and many more famed places
Are destitute of half that excellency
And divinity you still bear about you.

What a plaguey company of lies the Rogue has wound upon one bottom.


Your language Sir has spoken you wordly, and withal I am so well certified of
your generosity and nobleness, that I must needs blush and own the conquest you
already gained over my affection and weakness. I heard your noble Friend speak
in your (...) as greedily as griping Misers listen to the wills of of their
deceased frinds wherein they are possessed of large reve^


He Is my dearest and most faithful friend whom I am proud to entrust with the
disposeing of my most nice affairs


Sir, he shall be ever ^ceptable as from you.


Immortal thanks, divinest Lady!


Well Seignior Cornelia; here is my hand, and as I love pi^y -- thou art a pretty
fellow, would I were a young wench for thy sake


O Madam, I take you at your wish in faith. I Will en'e to the old Justice
immediately: slid i am so orejoy'd, -- I know not how ^y breeches hang, farewell
sweet Madam: I must straight to Plot-thrift and tell him this good news,
farewell sweet Mistress


Sweet servant yours.


Madam some extraordinary affairs exact my presence at Exchange, I humbly take
my leave and shall never be forgetful to employ my friend in my own absence to
commemorate my best services to your honored self, your servant sweet Ladies


Yours Sir.


We Will (...) you out.


By no means Ladies, you shall excuse me.


Ha, ha, ha, ha.


How now Gentlemen, could you hear all this while and not be realous.


Faith Coz. how did like it, did we not play our parts worthy your applause.


O incomparably.


Faith I seared all had been spoiled, yea jeered them so home.


Nay thei'r less beholding to Nature for allowing them so many ounces of beard,
scearsly to one dram of apprehension


Come what shall we do.


I what indeed.


Faith and troth lets take a walk together, and so with a littla fresh air
digest our late pleasant banquet


With all our hearts, and then we will consider more leasurely about
accomplishing our desired ends


Faith well adviz'd, come lets away we shall ore-reach their graveties.

-- As wisely said Lucullus
Old men are fools, when young men seek to gull us.

Pursue me not Florentio! let me dye,
Since she is guilty of inconstancy

Can you so much your Christian thoughts forsake
To murder life for a false woman's sake?

Could you endure so much misery
Still to be dying and yet never dye?

Can you so soon to misery bid farewell,
To meet with endless miseries in hell?
Suppress this passion or it will undo
Those noble arts which you have studied too,
Confound (what hitherto you have gaind) a Fame:
Destroy your parts and murder your good Name.

What friendly councel's given with what ease
By those who never felt the like disease!
But I (...) ^ower to perform what you give:
(...) afford me means to live!
(...) delay longer dispense
No (...) my patience,
(...) thoughts forthwith fulfill,
(...) pursue my suite and (...) my will.

Once more consider: that you run a course
against honor and virtue! nay what is worse
Offend those sacred. Deities, who preserve
Our lives that we their pious Laws observe.
It Is not your dying thus that can recover
Your lost content, for though a desperate lover.
Self murder makes you dye in flames for ever,
From whence there is no recovery! no never!

(...) and will forgive!

When you destroy that life which they did give^
(...) glorious a crime to commit
Out of presumption of a (...) for it.

These morals all are (...) away in me
Who (...) and misery!
I am past reason therefore (...) in^ain
(...) things again.
Since fair Ermenia does so inconstant prove,
(...)

(...) forbear!
(...)
(...)
That (...) before my Eyes!
Or do you think Florentio (...)
One happy hour (...)
(...), which cease to do
Or else by your dying I Will dye too!

I live Florentio that thou may not dye.

Friends self murder's Friendships cruelty.

But how shall I Ermenia's love obtain,
To hope for favor now is but in vain?

Nothing impossible with the powers above.

O that they would but petty one in love!

Come fear it not: all things will work forth'best
Mean time to sleep, your passion wants some rest.

NOw what think you on it Ben?


Faith but indifferent.


I have a double fear: I feel a kind of an itch of honesty within me, down
right honesty to Lucibella


And I to Clara as I am a Christian.


But I fear 'will never agree with us long.


As much fear I.


And then the small comfortable lives the poor wretches will have.


Nay I must confess they will be well hoped up with two staid husbands.


Yes like town bulls riding upon all they can leap. But hangh't handsome
English Girls and good fortunes may tie us close to their tails in time


O fie banish the conceit of Marriage! Lady without a score of scratches and
the like; these were your own words sir


Well they were so, I deny it not, nor am I yet resolved to do it: yet I am
prompted much, Money and Beauty are two taking bates and must prevail


Well conclude and i will join with you, either put forward or draw off: I dare
swear they are honest


Of that lets make a sound trial.


Agreed.


To what an honest part my labors tend,
No roguery but has some honest end*
Lets to them.


See here they are,


So, so, now Ben. follow my free fawning way directly and observe my motions.


Enough.


O my dear Luci.


O my dear Clara.


O dear Gentlemen.


Well met.


Whither march you Ladies?


To visit sir.


Who Lady? Man, Woman, Boy or Girl or what?


You are very inquisitive.


It Is the nature of the Country Madam.


It Is not your Nature I hope.


Perhaps while I am here, no longer.


Pray heaven it be not.

Why to tell you true, we are going to neither man, woman, boy nor girl, but
yet may meet many


We are going to the Physic Garden at the City gate end.


Please you Ladies we will wait upon you thither.


What say you Madam?


Pardon us fir, not for want of Love or respect but fear of our Fathers meeting
us, or some of his Acquaintance, we desire to be excused


Besides it may be a means to obstruct our future appointment.


You council well Lady.


I must confess that love is ill grounded that destroys it self through
ignorance, yet Ladies ere we part lets beg the happiness of your company to
take a glass of wine, here is a private Tavern at hand, besides your Masks
blinds all discovery whatsoever


Though Sir to grant your request is a thing as unusual with us, as those that
never did, yet to assure you of the good esteem I have of you and your company,
for my part I consent


Then I must yield too.


You honor us.


Please to name your wine Ladies.


What you like best Sir.


Canary I esteem.


It Is granted.


Canary: you shall Sir,


Now Lady we are blessed above the proudest of our former wishes, this happiness
was like a thing desired but far from expectation, as men forlorn and wretched
being content to dye and sure to suffer, wish to live, although they fully (...


(...)


We (...)


And hope (...)


(...)


(...)


(...)


(...)


(...)


Here Is the w^ and now (...) fill out drawer.


Here (...) i will (...)


Well (...)


Yo^ (...)


(...)


Nay (...)


(...) dishes full (...)


(...)


(...)


Thank (...)


What thinst you of an Air or two.


'Twood not do much amiss.


Ho Drawer.


Your will Sir.


Are the old Musicians in the house?


Yes Sir.


Employed?


No Sir.


Send them in.


I shall sir.


Now Ladies are you for a melancholy Love story, or a merry Tavern catch?


O fie, Love in a Tavern is as ridiculous as wine in an Alehouse.


Then come musicians lets hear the Tavern catch I gave you when I was here last.


Yes Sir.


COme let us be frolic and call for our tipple,
Our pockets we will empty and our veins we will fill
For Sack we will not lack, nor will we be griple
But carouse in despite of the two Topped Hill
Parnassus shall pass us
Nor will we enquire
For the front of the Musses
It Is Sack we desire.
Let the Frenchman delight in his white wine and red
His vinide paree is but pitiful geer
It Is the brave Spanish liquor that brings us to bed,
It charms all our senses and frees us from fear.

White Metheglin and brown,
It Is Sack we do love, so let it go down.

How like you this?


Very well.


There Is for your pains.


There Is something more.


Thank you Gentlemen.


Farewell,


I am something startled too.


Hanged now we are in we must through.


Come, come Gentlemen, underfavour this whispering I fear portends no good.


No hurt I Will assure you.


Whether tend you Sir.


Only into the inner room Madam for more air.


Your meaning.


Very harmless.


Now while they are whispering may I civilly steal a glass of wine of two: I
have enough I confess: but the Proverb says enough will have more, and I will
not cross it, yet this Canary is such a parlous liquor twill turn you a man's
head so long round that at last it will set it where his heels should be
(drinks) as for example.

But stand up Zachary the Bell does ring,
I dare not stay delay does danger bring.

For shame sir cease to prosecute a suit so beneath your worth, and prejudicial
to my reputation: I must not hear you


What a misery is this to be forbiden to complain.


Fie as you are a Gentleman urge it no more.


Reflect upon my misery and imitate the Gods in mercy.


Rather the Fiends should it be so.


I can now think you no better then a counterfeit Atheist that would desire
thus to allure me from my purity


The Gods see every thing: Nature nor Art can any thing conceal from them.


Should I be guilty of so foul a fault, I should impoverish my self to nothing
banckarupting my good Name and reputation, which who wants is a companion for
such wild people as never heard the Name of virtue, riches are fortunes
trifles, neither to be despised nor doted on, but well used

Poor virtue is most rich, and virtue it self
Was by the Ancients held the greatest wealth.

In your discourse you are too much a Stoic.


Young Ladies should not be so utterly void of all compassion.


I must leave you.


Not without hope of comfort, let me but taste of that which Crowns you famous,
your Virginity


I trespass on my Modesty to hear you, come sister.


Stay Ladies.


You have changed your countenance, your looks now promise you civil.


You are something altered too.


Ladies thus low we bend, and rather wish our knees grafted to the ground, then
rise without a double pardon: not only to forgive but to forget


Yet thus much we will say on our own behalfs, we had no end or aim to do as we
desired, but find away to search out your affections


Can this be true?


As Oracle.


Then rise.

Here then does all our former love rejoyn.
Pray heaven yours may be as pure as mine.

If ere I move the like attempt-agen
Impute me not the base, but worst of men.

I love you now as well as ere I did
Pray heaven you love me so, heaven forbid.
But that I should.


Since now we have vowed a constant faith on all sides, I think it requisite to
work a means to complete our happiness


That we must leave to you.


But we will plainly tell you, least hereafter you repent, we have no worldly
fortune but what our outsides promise: yet within you will find honest hearts


That Is sufficient.


My Father has Gold enough.


I and has the wit to keep it close enough.


Phew, have you no trick for that?


Troth I have a brain seldom empty of invention, I Will set my wheels a working
and make trial of one exploit


Sister we shall be late home.


I go, Gentlemen farewell good fortune speed your study.


We shall attend you on the morrow.


We shall expect you.


Now we are new men.


New married men that shall be shortly, well may we thrive no worse in that
state then we have in the Batchelors and are happy still


But we waste time.


True we have deep chests to dive into, it requires a great deal of cunning to
contrive it honestly, or at least without the Bar plea Felony

-- This once done
The fools are theated, and our loves are won.

COnvey this Letter Coz. unto my Lord Gonzetto, you know his lodgings, deliver
it into his own hands


Uncle I shall.


What grudge in thee procures the new grown hate
Of thy Ermenia? what unhappy fate
Has fixed her heart against thee, O that she
Should violate her vows of Constancy,
To make me miserable: I see 'twere fit
That Lovers vows upon the sands were writ.
What are these? I must be gone.


Your company Gentlemen does obleige me much.

Alas excuse us Sir, it is not such
Is worth your thanks, much less your obligation
Think it but worthy of your acceptance
And you will highly honor us since we know
For your favors many thanks we one.

Come lets not further complements commence
Your love to me extends all recompense.
I have a suit to you.


Name it and it is granted if it be
w'thin compass of my capacity.
Or my Friends.


Most willingly.


I doubt it not Sir.

I have a friend deeply engaged (indeed contracted) to the Lady Armenia, you
know her questionless


The Lord Gonzett's Deity.


The same my question is whether you think her inclinable to Gonzetto or any
other


Troth I think indifferent to any, but a little bending to Gonzetto by reason
of the weight of riches he throws on her


Very probable.


But he is fire all over for her.


It Is hotly reported so sir.


Pardon me sir that I dive into your thoughts, the Gentleman you speak of is as
I presume your friend by name Eusames. I am bold in explaining, but assure your
self and him sir, i will be his friend and Agent and can do much with Ermenia, and
will


In so doing you will obleidge two friends at once, the one sick of Love and
despair: the other of sorrow for his friends misfortunes. I was once his poor
Agent too, and then she promised faithfully to embrace him with all former love
and respect: but she had no sooner set her eye upon this glistring Lord but she
forgets her vows as if they were of no consequence


I know all circumstances, I will be very serviceable and I hope succesful, I
shall loose opportunities, therefore for the present farewell


To morrow sir i will wait on you, till then adieu.


HOw am I over press't'ween hope and fear!
It Is past the time and yet he is not here.
Would he would come.

-- Delays in misery and love.
Would breed impatience in Olymphick Jove.
O here he is: I joy you are come Sir.


Yes I am, draw


I am ready.


Secure him in Fetters till further order.


We shall my Lord.


Ha! is it so base Gonzetto.


You are bold Sir.


You are impudent Bandogs, how am I conquered with oppression! If you are men
of civility permit a Gentleman a minutes consideration, your reward shall not
be wanting and the limits I Am now confined in, is a sufficient security for me
your prisoner


We will obleidge you so far Sir.


Do so and i will be grateful.

Unfortunate Eusames.

Who have endured the raging of the sea
To enjoy two blessings Love and Liberty
And art no sooner well arrived on shore
But both are lost as much as was before.
Arm me ye Gods, with patience and content.
Manly to undergo Imprisonment.
Guard!
Now i will walk with you: my guard is strong
This is too sharp sure to continue long.

I have heard much of him.


He is our Countryman, and of rare endowments, genteel Parentage, and heir to
a good fortune, had it not been consumed by his Parents, for which poor wretch
he suffers


She Is very cruel to slight him, and settle her affections elsewhere
considering the contract


I shall plead Scripture and prick her conscience I fear ere she and I part.


Do so, i will work the way cross on my Lords side farewell.


Adeiu Coz.


Well met again Sir.


I was just a going to the Lady.


It Is too little purpose I fear.


The reason.


Why Eusames out of a mad vein this Even. challenged Gonzetto who met him with
a Guard and clapped him up


Yet not a pin the worse: for you shall see.
To morrow Morn he is at liberty.

It will be welcome news.

Well fear it not.
If I Am deceived I Will never trust a plot.

It Is strange.


It Is true Madam.
We meet it in the vulgar mouth: besides
I had it from the Captain of the guard
Who by command sirprised Eusames prisoner.

Leave me.
So strange a boldness is familiar
With men of noble Births, that though they fall
So low, that others think 'em worthless; yet
They of themselves still hold the same esteem.
And (what this Age thinks most rediculous)
Behave themselves as high, though not so wealthy.
Such is Eusames fate: whose love at first,
I entertained, because 'twas as rich as great:
But now being fallen from his high estate,
Still thinks himself as worthy of my love
As er'e: yet something I fain would do --

Well met Madam.


Thank you Sir.


I am come to chide you Madam, pardon me.


To chide me sir?


I you Madam, you once loved a Gentleman named Eusames.


O heavens! is my breach of sacred Covenants made common.


Nay and was contracted to him.


Too true indeed!


Too true! nay never repent: although his fortunes low, had you but given him
content he might have raised himself, indeed I needs must blame you


Proceed no further good sir, I am touched to the quick, and heaven knows I am
something troubled


Something, it must be altogether ere I leave you Madam, recall that love you
have settled on Gonzetto, and render it to Eusames as his due: he poor man
languishes in prison for love of you by base Gonzetto's means, spend no time in
recanting but use your utmost endeavor to gain his liberty


I can hear no more.


S'lid but you shall! unnatural woman could you think the Gods had no blessing
in store for his great virtue? whose merit could purchase heaven it self

(Reverently spoke)


Pray leave and hear me.


O are you touched,

Hear me? what can you say; alas invention's barren in your cause, a double
fee could not procure one word to stand in your defense. Did you not vow,
protest and swear your self a real votaress to his desires. Did he not with a
true and faithful heart when he was in his height of happiness honor and serve
you. And do you think it now reason sufficient to slight and disaffect him
because fortune at presant frowns upon him! ha! do you think there is desert in
naught but money? O unworthy? your corrupt soul belyes your form and beauty,
and ere I go i will cleanse it, if that your breast be penetrable to ought that's
good


O no more!

Why should you ring and twist that heart that is already broke, I love Eusames
and though orepour'd a while, I have not signified the force of passion as I
was wont, yet be shall soon apprehend a sudden thaw in that affection which he
presumed was totally another


Noble maid.

Pardon the harsh conjecture that I made, i will use no more for fear my fond
conceit fall into relapse, I leave you, and with such a blessing as dying
Fathers give their only sons, or saints to their penetant votaries


Worthy Eusames, unto whom I owe,
All that my utmost bounty can bestow!
I will be plain and real in my Love
Which may thy anger yet thy pardon move:
In holy writ, many did choose by art
Asarafice, but nothing like a broken heart.

GOne to England.


It Is very true sir.


Her letter declares that discontent caused her sudden departure, I hope
neither of you were unkind to her


I hope she speaks of no such thing.


Rightly she cannot.


I Am something troubled: but must wave it, this is a day appointed for other
considerations: a happy day for your Daughters, that must make your fortunes:
my great care has wrought it, and yours must be as great to entertain it: they
are gentlemen at all points, that when you are married will love, embrace and
chain themselves to your observance: nay a great part of their Estates too are
tied in a jointure which makes up the harmony, you are contented girls are you
not


A Husbands welcome, and as an humble wife I Will entertain him (but not the Him
you mean) the gentleman I have well observed, and he may please too: It is your
pleasure I should make him mine, and it has been still my duty to observe you


I sir as obediently submit to your pleasure in embracing Cornelio.


Good girls, come lets go in then: I love your modesties to marrow I hope you will
look more womenly


My Lord! Pardon me that I am a little retired, the cause shall be made evident
to your honor on the morrow being my Cozens wedding day: I have informed my
Uncle by letter that I am gone toward England, if he acquaint you therewith,
pray contradict it not, not yet fear but at his house to morrow I will meet
your embraces, I am and will be mor

Your Honors at command Ermenia.
Well it is honestly done, but pish Ermenia cannot be false: so much beauty
cannot harbor a double heart, I see it is not wealth nor riches can purchase a
fair soul, nor had my presents of gold ere gained a smile, had not the
influence of my Agents eloquence worked it. O happy man am I that shall possess
that matchless beauty Venice can boast off, that honest heavenly heart that
cannot withdraw a while but must acquaint her love and Lord. Well Cozen thou
that have been the Author of my endless blis expect a high reward

See here he is, welcome my noble friend, claim the performance of that high
promised reward I gave the, upon condition thou could any way win Ermenia to
marry me, see here her hand to confirm this same.


I hope by this my Lord you are assured she was not courted slightly.


No thou have been diligent and work's effectually, my hand and seal to the
Deputy of my Exchequer for five hundred Crowns shall be thy recompense. within
there Pego


My Lord.


Ink and paper.


It Is at hand my Lord.


Take that and with a promise upon my honor to advance the upon any request.


Your Honors bountiful, and for my part I must make an humble acknowledgment,
such is my obligation to the merit that I should think my best of labors
crowned in that Act could serve you


Thou art honest and excellent, I shall see you to morrow questionless at the
Nuptials


It Is very likely.


Till then farewell.


Good day to your Lordship.

Now Plothrift if thou thriv'st as well as I,
It Is a completed piece of Roguery.

UNto the Man imprisoned, black and obscure is the clear beauty of the
brightest day: through Iron grates he only sees the light and thereby does
increase his misery. Those whom he does perceive in joy to pass, augment his
wretchedness by making him to think that thus I lately was my self. But may I
dye abhorred by mankind if I repine at all. Arm ye gods my love with constancy
of mind that she may never forget the love of her Eusames. O Ermenia! the
exquisitest tortures that by invention ere were made, for the I would think
sports and undergo

May thou live happily and free from care
And all my miseries of no momentare.

There he is Sir.


There Is for thy kindness Jailer.


Thank you sir.


How do you sir.


Well.


Not so well as I could wish you.


As well as I could wish my self and that is sufficient, you are mistaken sir in
me, I am no base metal to be changed at every puff of wind: imprisonment is the
least of terrors to daunt a true courageous heart


Nay be not so hasty: I kindly come to visit you.


I kindly thank you then.


So sir are you sorry yet for your late desperate rudeness.


Sorry! no i will nere be sorry had I a term of life and liberty could last for
ever, and you could give it me, yes and would, for all or more i would nere be
reconciled to base Gonzetto's, as ignoble in heart, as made noble by thy Titles


Jailer.

Double fetter him.


You are too cruel sir.


You speak in vain sir.


It Is against the Law: he is no Fellon.


It shall be done.


It shall?


It shall. you are too bold.


No more then I can justify. Jailer forbear: look there high swelling Lord.

Throws him Eusames his pardon purchased from the Duke.


My pardon purchased by a stranger: it is very strange!


It Is very true.


Well Jailer you may release him.


O thank your honor for nothing.


Sir for this your christian courtisie with many thanks my best of services are
indebted to your kindness, and all too little to make the least part of
requital, yet withal let me entreat one addition of your love: in telling me
how or which way you heard of my imprisonment, and upon what grounds you grew
so kind to procure my pardon


I heard of your imprisonment by the relation of a friend of yours named
Florentio to a friend of mine, one Mr. Plotthrift by whose persuasion and my
own pity of your sufferings, I obtained this grant from the Duke for your
liberty, more I have to tell you, lets out of this Goal and you shall know all


Thus heaven has still a friend in store for those
That have but honest hearts though fiery foes.

NOw Gentlemen judge you whether I have not been very serviceable.


In that nature that really I think half my Estate a morgage to you.


Indeed I did not doubt your prevaling at the long run, but in so short a time
that your expedition deserves a double reward


My brother and I ere long shall study to requite you, but in the interim pray
accept of a few crowns in this bag.


Well Gentlemen I thank you, and if the like or any other service lies in me to
obliege you, you may command it, for the present i will take my leave


Are you in haste pray? if your occasions will permit, we entreat your good
company to a glass of excellent wine at a friends house of mine at the other
end of the town


All other concerns in me are laid aside to serve you.


Come then we will call on my Father Avaritius and thither presently.


withal my heart.


So my design is laid: but it is the end
Must crown the work: so fortune be my friend.

I wonder they come not.


It Is very late.


Are we set right?


Exactly in the place appointed,


Hush I hear a trampling.


Heaven send us safe home, they did ill to leave us and cross the fields so
late


Come sir fear not what small defense my sword and service may be to you shall
not be wanting


Your bag of money there, may cause some danger: and we have robbing spirits
walk the streets at this time of night


You are very timorous Sir.


Deliver all your money, or you are dead men.


O Murder, murder, murder!


Nay we will stop your mouthing.


Hellhounds what Devil has stirred you to this madness.


Nay we are not so mad to contend but deliver.


Villains redeliver my money or take my life and all, or i will have yours.


Nay pray Gentlemen spare my life and take all I have.


No sir first weel stop your mouth.


Now villain for you.


Come Sir take courage I have saved your life though to my loss of a hundred
crowns


Sir I thank you and if a thousand can make you amends you shall have them.


No Sir i will only desire your hand being a Justice of the peace, to a small
paper which will benefit a friend of mine in a high manner


That I would most thankfully were I but at home.


Come Sir i will see you safe at home i will warrant you.


I thank you good sir, heaven keep of a second brunt.


Nere fear it sir.


Will they not meet us again now.


O it is not imaginable, they are all desperately wounded and they will hold it the
safer way to cure those then to come and get more


You have a luccky hand.


COzen I much commend you, and much more love you now then ever I did.


Your joys will now increase, never fear it. But breach of contracts is a
second hell


What though his fortunes are at present low, when he injoyes content and
happiness in you, you will quickly see his virtues soon will raise him, I shall
wish you much joy in him


And so shall I.


I thank you both, and the like I shall wish you in your elections.


Why I, we never stood wavering, but as soon as we loved a little struck up a
blind bargain presently


We found they were wits and they will never leave working till they get wealth
enough i will warrnt you


But how will you get your portions of your father if you marry against his
will


O we never fear that the wheels of their Noddles are working for that design.


You shall see we will be married to morrow morn, my Father well pleased by noon,
we sporting in bed at night, and as loath to rise early next morn, as any two
couple in Christendom


Well i will pluck up a good spirit too, make a third couple, and see if I can be
served the same sauce


Gramercy Girl.


Hush my father knocks.


Up to my chamber.


I Am gone.


O girls had it not been for this courteous Gentleman I had been killed.


Killed.


I, killed we were set upon by Rogues, Villains, Thieves but this Gentleman I
thank him preserved me though to his loss of an hundred Crowns. Here Luci take
my key of my desk, there lies a bag of two hundred or thereabouts fetch it


I run sir.


Clara call my man bid him bring ink and paper.


I shall sir.


Pray sir sit down and assure your self whatsoever lies in poor Avaritius his
power to obleige you, you may freely command, for this never to be forgotten
courtisie


Pray sir impute this no such obligation, I was bound in nature to defend you.


O Complement no more, can you obleige me more then save my life from murdering
Rebels? no it is impossible. Then life nothing more dear


Here accept of this in part of future recompense.


You are liberal sir.


Now sir if you will please to produce your paper i will set my hand


Please you i will read it to you first sir.


No that will be too tedious, only tell me in two or or three words what it
means


Why a friend of mine lately taxed with a scurvy business and suspitiously
imprisoned, this is a narrative of his birth and education, to which if you
will be pleased to set your hand, as knowing him it may be a means to procure
his Liberty


That I will willingly, lets see the pen.


Pray sir your hand for a witness.


What is it sir.


Sirrah don't dispute but write your hand.


I shall sir.


And yours Madam.


Yes sir.


Sir for to night I bid you farewell. It Is very late and I am very sleepy.


Be sure be ready. Is Ermenia above.


Yes.


Within this hour I Will call.


We Will be ready.


Farewell my Dear.


Adeiu Love till anon.


Farewell Brother.


Now fortune i will adore thee, thou have been my Friend indeed. Thou have signed
me a deed that renders me a noble estate, fair Lucibella with thirty thousand
Crowns is mine, the like has Cozen with his Clara, my stolen hundred Crowns are
doubled too, well i will to my theiving comrogues and then go find out a Priest

Prospitious Heavens by this plots success.
Plothrift is raised to an endless happiness.

EXcellent.


Good.


Ha ha ha.


How savoury the old man smelt when we went about to faggot him.


How like an Owl in an Ive-bush the Rogue looked when we tied him neck and
heels


And made ugly faces when we gagged him.


O he prays for his deliverance.


Plot thrift i will warrant you will be his bosom friend, and he has cunning
enough to squeez him


His hundred crowns i will warrant you are doubled.


They are made thousands by this time I hope or he misses of his aim.


See here he is.


Ha ha ha! Hellhounds what Devil raised you to this madness? ha, ha, ha!


Ha, ha, ha!


How fares the old man?


O orejoyed that he is delivered: Gentlemen you are notable rogues and shall be
my bosom friends as I am his, see here a slender reward that he has given me


How Lucibela with thirty thousand crowns.


I think it is thirty, I Am sure twa's writ at length because I would not be
mistaken, look again


The like to me with Clara, O happiness beyond expression! let me hug thee for
thy cunning


I think I have plotted fairly, now nothing is wanting but a priest, the Girls
are ready at a call


Is my Ermenia with them.


Yes!


Then Sir to you I owe my life: you have loaded me with so many several
obligations that I am ready to sink under their wait, and could my wishes but
convert themselves into effects it should be my ambition to signify my self an
object worthy of your favors, till then I am your everlasting debtor


You are bountiful in expression, I am more then paid in your favorable
acceptance. But come lets go it is high time of day


I can direct you to a priest.


You will obleige us, lead the way you must be Father to us all.


Withal my heart.


Sure some ill fortune has betided them or crossed their designs.


Ha, ha, fearful Lucibella? fie for shame!


Better be fearful then fool hardy.


Pris. watch at the window, besure you do not nod, but give us true warning.


Do so Priscilla.


I shall be careful.


Come wenches what are you for singing or dancing.


It Is the maddest wench, fear nothing, sure thy love is not real, else it could
not be so void of fear


Well I am resolved to sing a song, we are all alone, and it is one of my own
composure


Prithee forbear.


Troth but I will, i would have you do the same and so take leave of singing clear,
'twill not be long I hope ere we loose our voices


How wildely she talks?


Come Cozen, begin.


A comely youth I once beheld
A bathing in a river
Where strait my passions rebelled
And scorh't my heart and liver.
Such might Narcissus beauties be,
But scarce so clear so white as he,
I veiv'd each part, and so
Saw something down below.
Which made my mind and heart a ramblinggo
High! ho.

I Am glad ye are so merry Ladies.


I Am sorry your so nere Gentlemen.


Come it is not time now to chat each minuits worth an hour, come away away.


MY Masters pray be wary and serviceable, Cook see all your sauces be sharp and
poynant in the pallat, that they may commend you: look to the roast and boyld
meat handsomely, and what new kickshaws and other de-delicate things you made.
Is the Music come


Yes sit they are at breakfast.


There will be dancing too, you must see this room clean: Butler let your door
be opoen to all good fellows, but have an eye to the Plate for their be Furies.
Peg you are for the linen, sort it and seek it ready for the Table, and see
the Bride beds made, and see the cords be not cut assunder by the Gallants too,
there be such knacks abroad, so go in all to your several duties

I now begin to remember I signed a certain writing to Mr. Plotthrift last
night, but what it was I know not. Zachary

Zachary what writing was it Mr. Plotthrift desired me to set my hand too: did
you see it


No sir?


No sir, and why no sir?


Because he told you what it was and you was satisfied and bid me set my hand.


What did he tell me it was.


A Narrative of a Gentleman's condition in prison.


What, I set my hand to warrant him before me.


Some such thing sir.


Very likely: go in.


My noble Lord most hearty welcome: good morrow noble Bridegroomes.


Thank you father, are your Daughters ready? it is high time for to send for the
Priest


Not yet I think: have a little patience and they will come down presently i will
warrant you, but my Lord you have not heard of my Neeces departure


Yes sir indeed to my great grief, I sorrow much for her absence; but now
perforce must study to forget I ever saw her


She went away abruptly, without taking her leave I know no reason for it, but
come my Lord and Sons that quickly must be will you walk into a glass of wine


We attend you.


HO! house! who is within!


Who would you speak with?


Where Is your Master within?


Yes Sir.


Id'e desire to speak a word with him.


Here he is sir.


Sir your servant I come to beg a boon of you.


My life! no sooner asked but granted, name it.


I take you at your word Sir, thank you, be pleased to give me and my friend
joy with your daughters


Why are you married?


This grave Gentleman will satisfy you if you doubt it.


Abused cheated, gulled, abused my daughters lost and undone.


How your daughters lost and undone.


I married to Vagabonds, Sychophants, and I know not whom!


Your servant Seniors, we have the Ladies.


Your servant Seniors, we have the Ladies.


Your servant my Lord I have the Lady.


'sdeath! --


Pray sir be well adviz'd, consider first what plea you have to commit this
outrage, your honor Sir cannot bear you out in it


Sir what is done was by Avaritius free consent, so that if you find your
selves abused in any particular: 'twas chiefly done by him


By me? it is false, my Lord discredit him, mere cheats and imposters!


Come sir to satisfy you and all these Gentlemen whose misled opinions thought
us merely the actors and contrivers in this plot, see here.

These with your own hand signed and sealed in the presence of Lucibella, Clara
and Pris. besides Zacharias, Tobit your clark, what say ye all is it not true


It Is undeniable.


How!


Most true an't shall like you sir.


I must confirm it too.


O patience!


Troth this is very well, it is true I always thought she had too much wit for
me


Well Heavens be thanked we bear not all the baffle on our own backs, well --


I am only sorry you spent so much culled courtship to so little purpose


I must bear it.


I could rage too, but 'twill be to full as little effect, come Justice you
ought to bear it best of all, Pox on it, this it is when old men must frolic and
be drunk at the Tavern, could you have kept your self sober on your daughters
wedding even, all had been well then, but now let things go how they will,
Gentlemen I wish you as much joy with your Ladies as I expected


We thank ye, Plot. Come father in Law lets hear as much from you. We Will
maintain your daughters according to their birth and fortunes


That we will.


And I your Niece according to my abillity, and what is wanting in that, i will
make up with love and good husbandry


Why this is some comfort, Gentlemen pardon me, I must be contented: well I
forgive and give you my daughters freely, and with them their portions of
thirty thousand crowns a piece, you sir my Niece with twenty, and so my
blessing with you all


Thank you dear Father, and pardon us that we have choos'd those whom we loved
and hope to live with comfort


I hope so too.


My Lord I beg your excuse I not been contracted ere I knew your Honor you had
been the only man should have enjoyed me, and my last letter to you was only to
obleige you to be here, to see how I am bestowed in which you have honored me
and I humbly thank you


Ermenia I am not so angry, but I can tell you that my love and esteem of you
is still as great as ever, though I am debarred that happiness of enjoying you:
yet I wish you a life so circled in with joy, that you may never breath a sigh,
and when you shall grow weary of the earth become Joves dotage and be Queen of
heaven, come Gentlemen be not so uncharitable but give joy.


No sir we wish all joy and happiness.


We thank you, come lets have a dance or two and so to dinner.


Agreed, agreed.


Well now,
Lets into dinner, but first take my vogue,
No Italian knave like to an English Rogue.

PLot-thrift Imposter! Thou must forthwith come
Before the Council board: They have past a doom,
For thy Imprisonment: Upon Information
Thou art a Rogue and Cozens the whole Nation.
Only these Ladies smiles can set thee free
But if they frown you must too Goal with me,

And hang my self for want of Liberty
How like you this Coz. As I am a sinner,
An ill dish of News at a Wedding Dinner!
Ladies, O dear Ladies, what shall I say
Pox take that English Rogue that writ the Play!
Will Not you be kind to smile and clap me too?
Should y'e ask me I Would do as much for you.
Be not close fisted: Consider that it may
Be your own case to want another day:
You may command me then and thereupon
I Will faithfully repay you three for one.
Join all your forces now and set me free,
One score of Claps and I Am at liberty.
Now Gentlemen I hope you are satisfied
On the same Covenants to clap my Bride.


