You Have met us in defiance of the Weather:
How has our Magic Conjured ye together?
'Twas a New Play, there doubtless lay the Charm
That drew to our forsaken Hive this Swarm.
To sooth your Humor more what could we do?
The Play to Night is New, the Poet too.
He, though an early Trespasser in Rhyme,
Never Climbed the Stage before, and judged this Time
For his first Venture safest, when the Road
Was clear, the Pirate Wits dispersed abroad:
He hoped whilst you to the Country were withdrawn,
TO have found an easy Jury of the Town;
But is surpised to see an awefull Pit
Met to Arraign him by the Laws of Wit;
Laws never performed by Mortal Writer yet.
Witches and Spells the former Age believed,
And as Authentic on the Stage received:
Our Poet fears they will hardly pass with you,
Who no Charms but in Beauty will allow!
Yet since such Lovers, Knaves, and Fools, have been
Shown on the Stage, as elsewhere never were seen,
Why should his Hagg's forced Characters appear?
'Cause your nice Reason doubts if Witches are!
He with a trembling Hand their Jargons wrote
The Entertainment of his Midnight Thought:
Meanwhile his Fancy, like a tender Bride,
With the Exercise lay Pleased and terrified.
With ease his Beldames Tempests Raise and Lay,
But could contrive no Spell to save the Play.
Their Art keeps Fiends in awe, and makes 'em Civil,
But Critiques spite of Fate will play the Devil.

We Will sacrifice to the obliging Storm
That lodged us on this Hospitable Coast;
O Realm beloved of heaven, Glory of Nations,
Whose Virtue vies with Mortals of first Ages,
E're lust of power in open discord flamed,
And waked the slumbring World into Alarms.

Whilst suffering worth and exiled virtue find
Reception here, what do we more then pay
A debt by Nature's law from Nations due?
But Prince, you bring more then a common claim,
Fame, worthy of your noble Ancestors --
There Is magic in his Language, Looks and Mien!
How has my hospitality betrayed me!
Permit me not just powers to perish by
The goodness you enjoin -- the impetuous passion
Storms at my Heart -- but I shall stand the shock.

Since the untimely fate of my Eudemia,
Grief so congealed my Breast I thought no glance
Could thaw me, but I melt before those Eyes.

His griefs like mists rise silent from his Breast,
And settle in a Cloud upon his Brow.
Confide Sir in the powers that favor virtue,
The remnant of your Fleet may yet be safe.

I Am escaped to shore, but my best Treasure's lost,
My Friend, the sharer of my heart and toyls!
When pressed by ravenous Death, devouring dangers,
To him as to an Altar I repaired
For refuge as t'an Oracle for Counsel:
His worth's large story would consume the day,
Oh he engrost the virtues of mankind,
Pious as Flamens, and for Martial deeds
A greater strove not on the Phrygian Plains.
Often watchful in his Tent he past the night,
Projecting the Enemies slaughter, while they slept
Dreaming perhaps of Victory.
None better knew the well-rang'd Files to force,
And clear a breach for rout and general ruin:
Or if with too unequal power oppressed,
How would he manage his reserves of the War;
His rallying Troops in firm Battalion fix,
And shield the gasping Battle to the last!
His groveling Squadrons stiff with cooling gore
His voice could quicken, to renew the Fray,
Forcing the greedy fates to wait, till they
Had snatched a Conquest -- but my zeal I find
Grows talkative and rude -- your Pardon Madam.

Proceed brave Prince, there is music in the relation.
Your Friend lives famed whilst you survive t'avouch
His wondrous worth in more surprising streins.

By your indulgence I Will resume the theme,
In which my fond soul is with pleasure lost.
In Childhood years with lisping Tongue I swore
With this Asaracus eternal friendship,
As my prophetic mind presaged how much
My future toyls would such a Partner need;
For when Youth's Down first flowr'd upon my Cheek
(Whilst practicing in the Chase the stubborn Bow)
I shot at Rovers, and by fatal chance
My Royal Father slew, an exile then
To Greece with my Asaracus I fled,
Where having found remains of the Dardan Race
By Grecian Tyranny oppressed, we raged,
Became their Chiefs, and led the ill-treated Tribe
To the Desert Hills, where sought by Pandrasus
Forth from our Mount'nous holds we sallied down
And chased his scattered Legion to the Cliffs,
Where plunging in the deep they shunned our fury.
This my Asaracus performed.
Next Morn' the Tyrant terms of peace proposed,
Free passage from his Coasts, with all our powers
In Squadrons culled from the Eubaean Fleet;
With the first wind we sailed, but having past
The Sound -- forgive an interrupting tear,
My dear Eudemia sickened -- dyed

I Am lost!
Vain as I was to tempt such charming sorrow.

At Delos first we touched, where with due rites
We approach't the Orac'lous shrine, whilst from the Cave
(In sounds that shook the Fane) the God pronounced
To Albion, Brutus, bend thy naval course,
Fate gives that seat of Empire; mighty toils
Attend thy way, and thou shall be divorc't
From what thou hold'st most dear -- that last dire Clause
Boded the loss of my Asaracus.
Thus Niggard Destiny by halves obliged me,
Gave me dull Empire while it snatched my friend.

Madam, the Ambassadors demand your audience,
Imperious and impatient of delay.

Admit 'em.

These Warlikes Guests at length may prove our Lords,
If no resenting Syracusian frame
Some timely project to supplant their power;
Each hour assaults me with a fresh temptation
To take the important task in hand, sure time
Must usher my designs from their dark Cell
Well formed, and fair as Nature from the Chaos.

From the Agrigentine Court we are arrived;
Our charge is short, but bears a weighty sense,
Our King by us demands your Love or War.

The seasons both of Peace and Arms alike
Conduce to swell his Glory, for he wears
With equal grace his Olive Wreaths and Laurel.

It Is in your choice to rule him or obey,
To mount or follow his Triumphant Carr,
To wear his bands of Conquest or of Love,
To ensure your own and share a greater Crown,
Or fall from Empire tendered and possessed.

Your servile flatteries have sure pufft up
Your Monarch to a self-reputed God,
He courts like Jove, with thunder in his hand:
But let him draw our just War on his Head,
It Is odds we will undeceive the flattered Mortal:
Let him approach like Mars in ruffled Dress,
His grisly Curls deformed with dust and gore,
Or like the Idean Youth with Locks perfumed,
Fragrant and cheerful as the rising Day,
We bid defiance to his threats and charms;
I weigh not of a grain his love and rage,
My leisure Theams of laughter and disdain.

Think how your infant Town defenseless lies,
An easy plunder for the next Invader.

Your storming threats are calmed into advice;
Your caution (though impertinent) was kind;
But to the Gods and her own Citizens
Leave Syracuse, she like the World's first Worthies
Wars naked, as Alcides in his Cradle,
When the Infant-God disarmed the hissing foes,
And chained the Captive snakes in their own Folds.

Your passion has had scope, and now we wait
Your more considerate and final answer.

To your Imperious Prince bear this reply,
Bid him despair both of my Heart and Crown,
Be the God of War the Cupid, which he brings,
Yet shall not Conquest his designs secure;
For should the chance of War leave me the loser
I Would fly to fate to shun his loathed embrace,
And in death's brazen holds make safe retreat.

Then for the last extremes of War prepare,
Despair not to enjoy that death you covet.

I knew their Embassy brought Love or War;
With their hot Master I Will divide the Queen;
Her Person be his prize, her Scepter mine,
His Lust of beauty and my lust of power
At once shall riot on their several Quarries.

Keep distance slaves, who offers at my Sword
Grasps certain death, your vile Hands shall not soil it,
I will resign it, but the noblest way,
And yield it with my Life an Offering here.

What means this bloody Steel laid at my Feet?

Young Hylax Son to this old Lord,
Lies slain in the Cloisters by this Princes hand.

My Hylax slain! and his bold murderer
Come reeking in his gore to dare the Law?
But I with more assurance could not move
The Gods for Justice, then the Queen I serve!
I Will use no Rhetoric, no Invectives seek
To aggravate my wrongs; All, all I crave
Is that the Queen would view that Blood, these Tears!

True, he is my Son, the fruit of my first Love,
Joy of Eudemia's Life, her dying care,
Our Countries hopes, and sole heir of my War,
Yet for his breach of hospitality
I yield him up to Law.

Disastrous chance!
Speak Prince, how killed you Hylax?

With my sword.

The occasion of the fray?

Warm in debate
He struck me, then before I could return
The blow, he drew, I drew, he thrust, I thrust,
And like a Trojan passed him through the heart.

To his own rashness then impute his Fate.
To doom the Princes death for self-defence
Would be to murder with the sword of Justice.
But to convince you of the strong regard
Which our deserving Subjects find with us,
We to your care our Citadel commit,
Full Successor to our late General's Honors.

I blush and bow beneath the mighty grace!
Now my designs take life, I Am now empow'rd
To do my self that justice she refused.
To my ambition too 'twill give pretense,
Make it approved, as generous brave revenge
That else had been detested Treason styled.
Thus specious forms give foulest crimes applause.

Asaracus -- my griefs convert to rapture!
Support me or the Ecstasie will kill me.

Your Squadron's safe arrived the shore, and I
To my Lords sacred breast.

There shall thou grow,
Nor will I more be wrackt with fears to lose thee;
Go kneel unto this hospitable Queen,
And take her blessing thankfully as Heavens.
A secret fear springs up to damp my joy,
And checks my transport for my friends arrival.
The cause too obvious is, I love this Queen;
And the soft Cupid at his presence shrinks:
He never will be won t'endulge my passion!
Yet -- why should he be Judge of what I suffer?
He Is stern, and never felt a pang of Love,
Can gaze unhurt on beautie's fullest blaze,
That blinds my weaker sight and makes me stray!
But these are dreams, I Will rowze and shake 'em off.

O Tutor great in Arms, the Gods can tell
How often your Martial precepts I revolved,
How punctual to each Mornings Exercise;
But oh! when I conceived you lost, it dampt
The glory I presaged in the Albian War
To think you lived not witness of my Fame,
To see me copy out your Rules in Blood,
When I no more should hear you tell of Battles,
Nor take new flames from your applause, nor in
Your Arms be claspt, and called your Royal Charge.

Once more let my embraces lock thee fast,
And chain my dearest blessing to my heart.
Teach me to make thy merit some return,
I would not die ungrateful -- take my glories,
The Scepter from my Hand, or Laurel from my Brow.

That were a sacrilege! as soon I Will wrest
The Thund'rers lifted bolts, your Soldier knows
No greater blessing then laid prostrate thus,
To kiss those Feet that with sure speed have trod
The loftiest tracks of Glory.

Rise my Friend,
And briefly tell the accidents befell thee,
Since we were scattered on the Ionian Flood.

When by the Tempest from the Squadrons snatched,
We passed the Harpyan Strophades to gain
Zacynthus Port, where having come t'a Road
The Surges topt us, and a Northern gust
From the head Lands fallen to Leeward drove us out;
Thus without Sun twelve times twelve hours we hull'd,
Till the Ledaean Twins in Lambent flames
Pearcht on our Shrowds, whilst we the Omen blessed,
And with warm Entrails (their Loved sacrifice)
Appeased the fretted Waves; with the next Light
Pachynus promontories we descried,
Where landing near the point,
We kneeled and jointly Hailed th'auspicious Shore.
Thence Coasting the vast Cliffs, Elorus Bay
We gained, where certified of your arrival,
Our clamours shook the Rocky Theater.
Roused Tritons from the Flood breast high appeared,
Gazed wondering round, and to the deep retired.

Our self will thither instantly repair,
To cheer the dear Companions of our voyage,
And bless the Gods as loud as the Storm raged.

All but my Amarante be withdrawn --
Come near; this distance is unkind, we are
Not Queen and Subject now, but Friend and Friend.
Thou have my heart and never deceiv'st my ear;
Tell me the present rumors of the State,
And how our Syracusians stand affected
To our reception of this Royal stranger?

Content smiles on each Syracusian's Brow,
Who for the safety of our Widdow'd Realm
Wait your Espousals with your Royal Guest,
To wed your Persons and your States together;
For this the suppliant Crowd to th'Altars throng,
Where with religious violence and joint prayers
They storm and press the Heavens into compliance.

Their prayers are impious and their zeal rebellion;
But thou more impious to approve their wishes;
Thou to seduce me to a second Love,
Thou that art conscious to my midnight vows
Of constancy to my departed Lord,
Whose Genius I with nightly worship meet,
Crown his dear Urn, and at his Tomb keep State,
Whilst hallowed Nymphs successively attend,
And through the Cell eternal Tapers shine.

I told (at your command) your peoples wishes,
But were my private choice approved, the Queen
Should hold her Syracusian State entire,
Not blend it with the strangers broken fortunes,
But banish from the Court the dangerous guests
To seek their promised Empire through the Main.

This is a worse extreme! rather then cruel
Be false, it is in our tender Sex a crime
More natural -- yet were thy Nature savage,
My soft example might at least have wrought
Some change, a tame bred Tygress will forget
Her fierceness, and domestic mildness take.

Yet whilst you charge me with a Tygress Heart,
Grant me at least -- to have a Woman's Eyes!

Ha weepst thou tender Maid! this gentle Shower
Has laid the Storm that would have wreckt my quiet.
Excuse the ravings of my feav'rish mind,
If I am difficult and wayward grown,
Impute my frowardness to my Disease!
Support me dear Companion on thy Breast,
Those Pillows yield me ease in every pain.
The restless Secret in my Bosom strives,
But when it is toiled with beating in the Cage,
It will grow tame and sleep.

For what offense
Am I abridg'd the dear and wonted freedom
To share your cares? To Favorites more esteemed
Your smiles and happier hours you may dispense,
But to your griefs I claim the first access;
My friendship early sought that privilege,
Obtained the grace and naught beyond aspired.

Oh Amarante guardian of my Breast,
Heaven so indulge my hopes as well I know
Thy truth, thy wondrous truth, and prize it dear!
So often (beyond the suff'rance even of Friendship)
I Have pierced thee with complaints of my hard fate,
Wounded thy tender Soul with tales of sorrow,
As none but Amarante would bear with me;
Yet (now I should discharge thee from thy toil)
Impose a new and heavier task of grief,
To mourn with my unhappiness of folly,
I am grown frail -- and love --

What you are pleased
Thus darkly to deliver, were in me
Presumption to expound.

Ah kind dissembler,
Rather then chide, thou will not seem to know
My frailty, but thy troubled Blushes give
That just Reproof this partial Tongue withholds!
I know thou would be shockt with the relation,
But now I Have told my grief I am at ease.
I wanted but thy aid to check my fears,
And crush the danger e're 'thas strength to wound.
This tender Cupid in his Cradle dies,
Nor shall he move me with his smiles or cries:
From's infant Hand I Will wrest the poisoned Dart,
And stab the little Tyrant to the Heart.

MY Lords, presume not of an easy Conquest,
Corrupted States lulled in security,
When with Alarms into confusion roused,
Are sacked with ease in their disordered fright;
Not so our Syracuse that nightly watches
And ever wakes to danger.

Let her wake.
When we assault we would find her on her Guard.

Beside, the Prince's Powers assist her now,
Troops fed by Rapine, and whose Trade is War.
Masters of Arms the uncertain Fray decline,
And foil by Stratagem a powerful Foe.
Suppose I point your Prince a bloudless Path
To his designs, and without danger, lodge
The Impatient Youth in this coy Queen's embrace?

Think not old Syracusian that we dote
Like thee, to credit a protesting Foe.

My Lords, to give you a resistless proof
That I am serious, know, it is interest.
Self-interest and revenge are the sure Springs
That drive my Wheel, and give my Projects motion:
I am abused into Disloyalty,
And like a Torrent from my channel forced
Where peacefully I rolled, will now bear down
And lay all waste where my diverted Current falls.

Say then what method will you choose to effect
Your glorious Crime?

A method safe and speedy,
The Citadel is in my power, and that
Commands the Town below; if then your Prince
Conspire with my design, let him convey
A trusty Legion hither, which by Night
I will admit into the Palace, where
The Queen may be surpised.

It Is well designed,
And we stand Sureties for our King.

But stay,
Our Terms of Compact be agreed on first;
None are unjust or just but for Reward:
I Will sell my virtue, but I Will rate it dear,
I will possess the Crown which I betray,
When I renounce my Loyalty I Will Reign.

Yours be the Scepter then, provided you
Submit to hold it of our King.

Agreed.
Thus kneel we then t'invoke the conscious Powers,
And with our clashing Swords the Contract bind.
Now that keen Steel be sheathed in the Owners Breast
That starts from his given Promise.

We have Sworn.

Thus far I drive not but am driven, and glide
On a smooth Current into glorious Ills.
The Court are bound to Morrow for the Chase,
Old as I am I will be first in Field,
There to consult the Sorc'ress at her Cave,
To my dark Plots her darker Counsels join.
The rig'rous Amarante may receive
My Suit, when in Imperial Robes I woo.
Fortune sets me at once Love and a Crown,
And boldly I resolve to throw at both.

She Is Fair! all Beauteous -- but what is that to me?
Nature seems curious to have made her Charms
Excel; but why should that disturb my Quiet?
It Is mean! I Will not endure't! my warlike Heart
Become at last a wanton Cupid's Toy!
He curls about me, but I Will tear his Hold,
I Will bear the soft Enchanter to the Camp,
And scare him with Alarms: he will quit me then.
The Charming Foe appears; I Will bear up roughly,
And make a bold Reprizal of my Heart --
Stay Madam, I have business of Importance,
A Secret to impart.

To me Sir?

Yes.
It Is a Discovery I have lately made,
(A truth that never could gain with me till now)
That -- Lovers Hearts will ache!

And call you this Discovery?

A most surprising one to me, I thought
Their Smart and Pangs were mere Imaginations,
They sighed, and wept, and swore, and raved of Wounds
Invisible; I praised the Mimick Craft,
With wonder saw the pale Youth's trembling Visit:
The tenderest, gentlest Creatures Nature frames!
But I am now seized with the Frenzy too;
And charge you with my sufferings; you have wronged me,
Possessed me with a fond and foolish Pain
Which I despise; -- Yet trust me, it is uneasy!

How various are his Forms! this Protean Love
Sighs with the Silent, with the Frolic smiles,
Weeps with the Soft, and in the Soldier storms.
The Wrongs you accuse me of, I nor designed
Nor knew, if you are serious, charge not me
With what I could not help.

By Mars nor I.
But if my folly should grow troublesome,
As you are merciful indulge it not,
It will divert me from pursuit of Glory;
Whatever my fawning Passion may pretend
Believe it not, for I was never formed
For Love, but bred in the Camp, rockt in a Shield,
And cannot take the softness Beauty craves;
Want all the little Arts to please the Fair.

I am at once provokt to Smile and Rage.

I do not think I shall again offend you
With Talk of my rough-cast unpolisht Love,
But if I should -- Oh to my Fame be just,
Disdain my Suit and frown me into silence.

Despair not of so cheap a Charity.
You Will find me Sir, reserved as you could wish.

I thank thee -- now I grow my self again;
The peevish Pain has raged it self asleep
To wake no more: 'twas a tormenting Fit.

His surly Passion bears so odd a Grace,
It charms me more then all the smiling Loves;
But I am sworn impartial Foe to all.

My Lord, the Queen invites you to the Chase
In The Morn'.

We Will wait her Majesty to the Field.

To the Chase? I like it not; I have seen nothing
That shakes my temper more then that old Lord;
Mischief and Destiny lower on his Brow.

O my Asaracus, how much I feared
On what the Delian God presaged, that I
Should be divorc't from what I held most Dear,
The hasty Fates had cruelly performed
In snatching thee -- ye Powers secure my Friend,
And from your promised Empire be absolved.

Perish a Legion nobler Lives then mine,
E're Brutus be from the Albian Isle diverted;
Your rich Loins hold an endless Race of Kings,
Fair Albion of their Reign The Eternal Seat,
Albion, that in the Floods erects her Cliffs
Sits Queen of the Seas, whilst the awed Nations round
At distance wait, and in their mutual Jarrs
From this great Arbitress take Law; their States
She poizes, and to Each deals equal Power.

Thou speak my Friend as thou were still at Delos
One of the Orac'lous Tribe, whilst hallowed Wine
Had steept thy Breast for the Inspiring God.

Alcander in the late Storm was Embarqu't
With me, you know him by Descent inclined
To Prophecy, and like his Sire Inspired:
Of The sudden I observed him knit his Brow,
Look wild, start, laugh, and grow composed again.
Then prostrate fallen lay breathless, till anon
The Rapture flusht him, and his Dancing Blood
Glowed through his Veins: thus wrapped, in wondrous Style
The Fates of future Ages he Divined,
Prodigious Glories that in the Albian Isle
Wait noble Brutus and his Progeny:
The Conscious Storm with reverend Silence heard
The Prophet speak, and then resumed its Fury.

Thou fir'st my Soul, make Glory dart upon me
So fierce, I must have Respite or expire.
At leisure I will hear of this at large,
The Queen approaches now, this Passage leads
TO Argaces Cell, where nightly she repairs,
There to Devotion she converts her Love,
And treats her dead Lords Genius like a God,
With fragrant Flowers and Gumms then Flowers more sweet
Perfumes his Vault, believes him there invisible
And pleased with her Officious Piety.

It shows her strange Regard to the Diseased.

Regard! Asaracus, called not Regard,
It Is Superstition, Fondness, Zeal misguided,
And pity it is but she were undeceived.

But why my Lord should her mistake offend
Your Quiet?

Ha! whilst I accuse her weakness
How has my foolish Heart betrayed its own!
It Is true, it was in me a wild Concern.
No more -- good Rest my Friend.

Permit me wait you in.

I would be private.
Sleep ye great Manes of the Dead,
Whilst our Solemn Round we Tread,
Whilst at our Cell as at a Shrine,
We nightly wait with Rites Divine;
Whilst to adorn the Tomb we bring
The earliest Glories of the Spring,
And Sweetest Softest Anthems Sing;
The Floor with hallowed Drops Bedewing,
And all around fresh Roses Strewing.
Ye Guardian Powers that here resort,
For ever make this Cell your Court;
If devoutest Prayers invite ye,
Or Sabaean Gumms delight ye,
Then make this Sacred Vrn your Care,
And nightly to this Cell repair,
To Feast on Frankincense and Prayer.
Around we go the Floor bedewing,
Violets, Pinks, and Roses Strewing.

Hail, ever hail, ye sacred dear Remains
Of my Argaces! Hail my first last Lord!
Accept thy Widowed Queen's Religious Sorrow;
Her restless Love pursues thee to thy Grave,
Nor glowed more vigorous in the genial Bed.
What sudden Damp congeals my streaming Language?
My stubborn Tongue refuses to perform
Its practiced Task! my Rebel Eyes withhold
Their wonted Tribute -- This new Flame,
This feav'rish Flame has drunk up all my Tears!
Whilst my Argaces Genius I Invoke,
His Rival's Image on my Thought intrudes,
And from his Seat the rightful Owner drives.
Prince Brutus? or Argaces in his Shape
To tempt my Constancy? Heaven! it is the Prince!
As at the appearance of an Angel, I
Am Terrified and Pleased! -- My Lord, this Visit
(Not to impeach you of a Rudeness) is
Unseas'nable at best and indiscreet.

My Indiscretion justly you impeach,
But who was e're a Lover and Discreet?
Give me my Ease again, my settled Mind,
And I Will again grow formally Discreet.
Speak fair Tormenter, when will you remit
My burning Pain? not one cheap Sigh or Tear
To cool or quench me?

Wave this wild Discourse,
It strikes like Blasphemy a terror through me.
Why heaves my Heart? I know my Virtue's strong,
Yet dare not trust the Magic of his Tongue;
It Is Sweet, but Fatal as a Syren's Song.

Or if you are resolved on my Destruction,
Temper at least Reluctance with your Justice,
And seem not to take pleasure in my Ruin.
I would not die with an accusing Thought
Of you, but Bless you while you give me Death!

Ah! how the soft Temptation steals upon me!
But I Will not dally with the Smiling Danger,
Nor sport with Fire -- Retire my Lord
As you regard a Queen's unspotted Honor.

I, like a Miser's Ghost, all the day long
Confined to Flames, and having made by stealth
A Midnight Visit to my Treasure, am
From the dear Wealth untimely summoned off
To howl Disconsolate in Flames again.

Yet have the wretched comfort of the Damned,
Companions of your Woe.

Has then a spark of Love
Touched that dear Breast? ah lest the Snow that is there
Starve the weak kindling Fire.

I rave, I rave!
And in my Frenzy had almost disclosed
The dearest Secret of my Soul -- be gone
Or by that Sacred Tomb --

I go, and for a parting Lover
Make wondrous haste, however you think me slow!
Oh winged with Hope I entered, but return
Stripped of my Plumes, and cumber'd with Despair.

Replying still? -- Ungrateful Prince farewell.

Stay Queen! Whirlwind and Thunder snatch me hence
E're I commit so dire a Crime
As t'interrupt your pious Rites;
Yet think not my Approach Rude or Profane,
Even at the Shrines of Gods we are allowed
To tell our Griefs, and I design no more!
I crave no more then Piety may grant,
One tender Look, a pitying parting Sigh!
It Is all my banished Soul has to sustain her
'Till I Am restored to those dear Eyes again!

What can I give, when Charity to you
Is perjury to my deceased Argaces?
Who never will remit the Right I gave,
But hoards my Vows like Treasure in his Tomb.

Vows to the Dead are canceled when they are given,
And with the Breath that formed 'em blown away.
My Vows to my Eudemia equal yours,
Nor will her peaceful happy Shade reproach me,
That I from you seek Bliss she cannot give!

Defend me Prince!

Eudemia whom I named!

And my Argaces Image!

Argaces Ghost? a Rival from the Dead?
Journeys ill destiny this way to Night,
And thou its Harbinger? Speak awefull Shade!
What magic bringst thou from the nether World,
To chill my boiling Blood and freeze my Spirits?
Injurious Spectre, when did I invade
Thy World that thou should come to Forage here?
Avaunt, Descend, and to the Greeks below
Boast if thou will that thou made'st Brutus Shake.

Warned from the Fates let us Converse no more,
Nor run with open Eyes upon our Ruin!
Alas, how fatal must our Hymen be,
When the Dead rise our Nuptials to forbid?

Falsely your Fears interpret their Design!
The Ghosts appeared to give us their Consent!
What false illusions am I forced to frame!
What will not Love-rackt Minds pretend, to gain
A Minutes respite from their torturing Pain!

THis is the dreadful Sorceresse's Cave,
Where sullen Fiends, Hell's Malcontents conspire,
Whilst at the ghastly Board the Hag presides,
Weighs their Debates and sways the dark Cabal.
Ho Ragusa! dread Prophetess appear:
Assist an Heart that labors with vast mischief,
And with thy Spells secure the fatal Birth.

Who interrupts when I Am at work for Hell?
Whos'e'rethou art, I hate the Light and Thee.
Ha! Soziman? thou art a hopeful Son,
A working Head, industrious for Perdition.

Instruct this feeble Arm to shake a Throne,
And snatch a Crown.

Let it be steept in Blood!
'Twas my initiating Ceremony
To my dire Art, I was installed with Slaughter,
Nor could I raise me to my airy Rounds,
'Till I had bathed my Limbs in Infants Gore.

Hark, the Game's roused.

So merry! -- Well, it is odds I mar your sport.
By Contract, Son, I hate all humane kind,
But envy most the prosperous and great;
Thou art devoted to the Queen's destruction,
And so am I; this day begins her Ruin.
Take that.

The Intent?

It Is the Queen's Bane.
Thou know the Custom when the sports are done
The Court repairs to the Diana Fountain,
To worship there the Goddess of the Woods,
And drink of the cool Stream; the Queen drinks first,
Mark me, Prince Brutus and the Queen drink first,
Into their Bowl see thou convey that Philtre,
It fires the Chastest Breasts with loose Desires.

Speak on, for now thy voice grows full of Fate.

When they have drunk, an entertainment follows,
Then when the Philtre has for dalliance flush't 'em,
I will by Magic pour a Tempest down,
Hail, Rain and Fire, th'ingredients of the Storm;
Scattering the Company to the Caves for Shelter.
At the same Cell the Prince and Queen shall hide,
Where she forgetful shall resign her Honor.

Ha! ha! I shall be doubly mischievous,
At once a Traitor to her Crown and Virtue.
But I to Virtue am a foe professed,
And sworn to storm her in her strongest Holds.

Since mischief is ingrafted to thy Nature,
I Will teach thee all the Arts of doing ill;
The surest Spells to work distorting Pains,
T'enfeeble Loves, and breed eternal jarrs,
To blast the hopes of the laborious Swain,
And sink returning Sailers in the Bay,
To poison Floods, infect the Air, lay waste
Whole Empires: This I Will teach thee, and to thee
I will bequeath my Goblins when I die.

Farewell, methinks my Road to greatness now
Is grown so plain, I may discharge my Guide.
This for the Queen; and may the Dose prove strong.
I should have learnt from her the readiest way
To hasten the removal of this Prince
From Syracuse, his Powers may check my Plot
With the Ambassadors -- I have bethought me;
His Friend Asaracus is bent on Conquests
And Crowns in Albion whither they are bound;
I Will serve my ends of his rough Martial Virtue.
He comes this way, as I presume, forsaking
The Chase in discontent, if he discharge
His Followers, I Will attaque him.

Nay, good my Lord withdraw not from the Chase,
You Will disoblige the Queen and Court.

Away.
It Is a divertisement I never affected,
My Youth sought rougher Labors, and was taught
To lay a Stratagem, not set a Ginn.

Some deep resentment grudges in his Breast.

That e're our Nations Glory should have reached
These distant Lands, and we our selves arrive
To contradict the Story of our Fame!
Unworthy of our noble Ancestors,
Unworthy of our former Selves.

My Lord,
Some respite to our Labors must be given.

Dull restive Soul! it is this degenerate sloth
Holds our fallen State in its sad Ruins still;
Had we been Active, followed leading Fate,
Our Standards in mid Albion we had fixed,
Founded the eternal Monarchy e're now.
But I divert ye from your Exercise.
Return, go Sirs, and help to fill the Cry:
I have Affairs of weight to think upon,
And seek advantage from this solitude.

O he is just in the Tune I wished to find him.

Not all my Labors of the Seas and Field
Brought half the Terror of my present Task!
To tempt the Fury of my Prince and Friend,
To rowze him from his ecstasie of Love,
Is the severest Trial of my Duty;
But I must trace my Loyalty through all
Its roughest Paths -- Ha! Lord Soziman!
What has withdrawn your Lordship from the Chase?

It Is long since I of Pastimes lost the relish,
The public care preys hourly on my Breast;
More anxious Fears sting not fond Parents Hearts
At midnight musing on the various chances
May snatch their Offspring, then aged Statesmen feel
For States which their indulgent care has nursed,
How much they dread lest mischiefs from abroad,
Should crush 'em in their helpless tender years,
And when grown up to strength lest Riot drown 'em.

Your public Trust is large, and this concern
Is worthy of your Dignity and Years.

'Twas rude to press upon your Privacy,
But needful 'twas for me to find you private;
I have Proposals of much weight to offer,
The blessed Result of my long laboring Thought.

To honest Motions I never shut my Ear.

Know then the circumstances of our State
And yours, seem to invite a speedy Union,
For both lie now exposed to Foreign Powers,
But joined, can frame a Realm invincible,
Of strength to awe the neighboring Nations round,
To th'outmost Isles and distant Poles give Law.

At last his hovering policy is pitched,
And come about to the Perch where it designed
To fix, though to beguile me it flew wide.

The Nuptials of your Prince and our fair Queen
Will finish this design, you may perceive
Your generous Master of himself inclined,
And will with secret Transport be advised
(By you who rule his Breast) to prosecute
In The public Name, what is his private choice.

Nay then it is time to rowze him from his Dream
They Have found his weakness and would practice on it,
But they shall find he had a Friend that wak't
To guard his Glory when 'twas slumber-charm'd --
Sly Lord, how is your Wisdom now o'reseen?
You know me Rash, and should believe me Honest,
And yet have dared to engage me in a Task
That Is neither feazible nor just;
Think on your pious Queen's vowed Constancy
To her departed Lord, and then be mute.

The Rudeness were too gross and past all Pardon
TO engage you in unfeazible designs,
But to encourage your Endeavors, know
That 'midst her pious Vows she languishes
With a resistless Passion for the Prince,
Of which perhaps he is not Ignorant.

Hell! if he once discover her Affection
He Is lost for ever -- but I Will force him hence
E're the soft charm prevail too far upon him.
Dull Politician, thou have spun thy Snare
Too gross to catch even cred'lous Honesty!
Yes, I will use my Interest with the Prince.
Persuade, prevail, but counter to your Projects.

Rash Warrier go, and in mistake perform
This poor dull Politician's work: ha! ha!
All pufft with fond conceit of a Discov'ry,
He Is gone off pleased!
Just such a stock of Brain as Heroes need,
Mere Engines of the State in times of danger
By skillful Artists played:
But when War's Flame is quenched, again laid by.

Hark, the Stagg's fallen, and now the Court comes on
To the Fountain to perform the Sylvan Rites;
It Is time we were preparing for the Storm.
Heed me ye Daughters of the Mystic Art,
Look that it be no common Hurricane,
But such as rend the Caspian Cliffs, and from
The Hyrcanian Hills sweep Cedars, Roots, and all.
Speak, goes all right? or have ye ought observed
Odd and ill-boding? for last night me thought
The Moon changed color, and her Horns grew blunt:
Boots Wain o'return'd and lost a Wheel,
The Pummel-Star fell from Orion's sword.
Speak Lamiae!

Uh, uh, uh, uh!

Do You start? I Will charm ye Marble but I Will fix ye.
Pronounce, and while ye speak, breath Blasts and Mildews.

The Cricket leaves our Cave, and chirps no more.

I stuck a Ram but could not stain my Steel.

His Fat consumed in the Fire and never smoak't.

I found this Morn' upon our furnace Wall
Mysterious words wrought by a slimy Snail,
Whose Night-walk Fate had guided in that Form;
The imperfect syllables our Ruin speak.

Call up my Spirit Daran to expound.

Daran's in hold, poor Daran's prisoner taken,
In Scylla's Rock ten fathom deep he groans,
With such dire Magic bound, such potent spells,
I fear he will never be at large again.

Beshrew the Beldame! this was Magra's mischief,
I Will rive the Rock to the Roots to set him free,
And then on Lightning ride to fire her Cell.
By all the dismal secrets of my Cave
I will not leave her Power for pettiest mischiefs;
No not so much as to breed Must in Fodder,
And make the stall'd Ox pine at the full Crib,
Not to raise Blanes on Tongues that flout and curse her,
Or silence in her Night-walks barking Currs.

You Are Queen of Mysteries, great Ragusa,
How have thou stemmed the Abyss of our black Science?
Trac't dodging Nature through her blind Scape-Roads,
In her dark Mansions seized her, stripped her Veil,
And brought her naked and trembling to the Light?

Now to our Task, and for encouragement,
Remember that the Tempest we now raise
Will be attended with a mighty Ruin,
The Queen's Perdition, think on that, my Gorgons:
From this malignant hour her better Stars
Their influence shall withhold, her Guardian Genius
Neglect and leave her a devoted Prey.

Fate so decrees, I searched the eternal Scrowl,
Read smiling the Contents of her black Doom.

Stand off, and crouching Mystic Postures make,
Gnawing your rivell'd Knuckles 'till they Bleed,
Whilst I fall prostrate to consult my Art,
And mutter Sounds too sacred for your Ear.
The storm's on wing, comes poud'ring from the Nore,
'Thas past the Alps already, and whirls forward
To the Appenine, whose rifled Snow is swept
To the Vales beneath, while Cotts and Folds lie buried.
Once more come round me and attend my counsel.
When we have served our ends of Soziman
(Who by our aid pursues the Queen's destruction)
We Will ruin him.

Be that my task.

It shall.
Thou Myrza take to night an airy march
To the Pontick Shore for Druggs, and for more speed
On my own Maple Crutch thou shall be mounted,
Which bridled, turns to a Steed so manageable
That thou may rein him with a Spider's thread.

And how if I o're-take a Barque in the way?

Then if aloft thou go, to Tinder scorch
The Fanns; but if thou take a lower Cut,
Then snatch the Whip-staff from the Steers-man's Hand,
And sowce him in the Foam.

He shall be drench't.
But see the Court are 'lighted from their Coursers,
And walk this way.

Scudd Borough in your Caves.

'Twas such a holding Chase as did almost
Convert the sport to toil.

'Twas desperate Service.

What means Asaracus?
His looks and language are of late grown dark.

We are late, and must dispatch the Fountain Rites
With shortest ceremony.

Queen, glut thy Passion, feast on poisoned sweets;
Enjoy, and perish, Soziman
Would plot thy Pleasure on no other score.

This to Diana's Immortality.

To great Diana's Immortality.

This to the Triple Goddess.

It thunders in the Wind, 'twill be a Storm,
The North Sky low'rs.

It Is but a flying Shower,
And should it drive this way, the Caves are near
To yield us shelter. -- Let the Masquers Enter.

In all our Sea-disasters I never knew
So swift a change of Weather.

All shift for shelter.

I, this is Music! now me thinks I hear
The shrieks of sinking Sailers, Tackle rent,
Rudders unhinged, whilst the Sea-rav'ne^s swift
Scour through the dark Flood for the diving Corpses.
Ha! art thou there my melancholy Sister?
Thou think thy Napp was short, and art surpised
To find night fallen already.
More Turf to the Fire 'till the black Mesh ferment;
Burn the Oil of Basilisk to fret the Storm.
That was a merry Clap! I know that Cloud
Was of my Fricker's rending, Fricker rent it:
O it is an active Spirit! but beshrew him,
'Twas he seduced me first to hellish Arts,
He found me pensive in a Desert glin,
Near a lone Oak forlorn and thunder-cleft,
Where discontented I abjured the Gods,
And Bann'd the cruel Creditor that seized
My Mullees, sole subsistence of my life:
He promised me full twelve years abs'lute Reign
To banquet all my Senses, but he li'd,
For Vipers flesh is now my only food,
My drink of Springs that stream from sulfurous Mines;
Beside, with midnight Cramps and scalding Sweats
I am almost inured for Hell's worst tortures.
I hear the Wood-nymphs Cry, by that I know
My Charm has took, the Tempter has prevailed,
'Twas a sure Philtre -- but the Day clears up,
And Heavenly light wounds my infectious Eyes.

Now sullen Dame, do thou approve our works?

'Twas a brave wreck, oh you have well performed.

Myrza and I bestrid a Cloud, and soared
To lash the storm, which we pursued to the City,
Where in my flight I snatched the golden Globe
That high on Saturn's Pillar blazed in the Air.

I fired the Turret of Minerva's Fane.

I stayed in the Cell to set the Spell a work,
The Lamps burnt ghastly blue, the Furnace shook,
The Salamander felt the heat redoubled
And friskt about; so well I pli'd the fire.

Now as I hate bright Day and love Moonshine,
You shall be all my Sisters in the Art:
I will instruct ye in each mystery,
Make ye all Ragusa's.

Ho, ho, ho!

Around me, and I Will deal to each her dole.
There Is an Elf-Lock, Tooth of Hermaphrodite,
A brace of Mandrakes dug in Fairy Ground,
A Lampray's Chain, Snakes Eggs, dead sparks of Thunder
Quenched in its passage through the cold mid Air,
A Mermaids Fin, A Cockatrice's Comb,
Wrapped in the dried Cawl of a Brat still-born: burn 'em --
In whispers take the rest, which named aloud
Would fright the Day, and force another Storm.

Ho, ho, ho, ho!

FRom Shades to Court, from Court to Shades I fly,
But bear my Torment with me where I go,
Thought-rackt and Restless as a Murd'rers Soul!

Unload your burdened Heart into my Breast,
My active Love may find your Grief a Cure.

Why art thou curious for a sight of Hell?
A Vision that would fright thee to Distraction!

If yet my Duty be not thoroughly tried,
Command me take a Scorpion to my Bosom:
If I refuse, neglected let me live
Defamed, forlorn, disowned of Heaven and you.

You Are Brave, and fit to share a Queen's Afflictions!
Sit then and hear the Story of my Shame,
But let the Sun, as from my Crime he hid
His sacred Light, withdraw while I relate. --
Thy Queen for constancy to her first Love
Long Famed, and long deserving to be Famed,
Is now, ah Torture! a forsworn Adultress! --
My trembling Limbs dissolve at the dire Sound!
Believe me not, for I belly my self!
Think thou the Gods could e're permit such guilt?
They could, and the Infernals know it is true!

Nay, now I must commit a force upon you,
My violence is just and charitable.

You Are wild as I to grapple with my Passion,
That like a Tempest sweeps with lawless Rage,
'Till spent it sighs it self into a Calm.
From Honor's heights which I with toil had clim'd,
How am I in a moment fallen
And plunged in Infamy!
The Almighty Powers beheld, and yet created
No Prodigy to awe me from the Danger.
My stupid Virtue slept,
My Guardian Genius slept,
The Planets idly gazed,
And all the Starry Host
Sat unconcerned Spectators of my Fate!
My struggling on the Rack
But Tortures me the more;
I Am stabbed with thousand Deaths, but cannot Die!

Ungrateful Prince that could so ill requite
A generous Queen that hid thy impious Head
From Heavens pursuing Vengeance!

Oh, He Is too foul to be a Victim made
To Heaven, no he shall bleed my Sacrifice:
My wronged Argaces waits for his Descent,
To seize the Adulterer at the Elysian Bounds
And sink him yelling to the Abyss of Fire!

Weeping? those Eyes rich Nature's choicest Gems
Should sparkle, not dissolve.

Ah Hypocrite! Hell rages in his Breast
And Heaven smiles on his Brow.

Your Sorrow racks me, from those Eyes I feel
A cold Damp shot into my conscious Heart,
Suppress those Sighs and call to Heaven for Thunder.

Why chills my Rage? that soft deluding Tongue
Soothed me out of my Innocence before,
And oh I fear 'twill sooth my Justice now!
Delay slacks my Resolves! with open Eyes
I cannot wound him but I Will wink and strike.

Oh Madam you to Tyranny pursue
Your Conquest, and a yielding Heart oppress!
Kill me and cease to grieve, let my Life's Blood
Compound to save that rich Expense of Tears.

Oh Fate! I have his leave to give him Death,
But now my eager Rage has seized its Quarry,
Pants over the Prey, and wants the strength to Kill.

My Eyes Distill! like wounded Duellists
I strive in vain to hide the pressing Stream;
Madam, You see my Frailty, how I melt
T'effeminate Tears, your Sorrow Triumphs over me,
And boasts the Power to have made a Warrior weep!

At such complaint a Tygress would Relent,
The Furies cast their Torturing Engines by.
Thus then injurious Prince to my Revenge
Another Course I steer; to Heaven I make
This solemn Vow --

Hold, hold! by all that is good
Let me conjure you stifle that rash Voice!
I know not what you were prepared to Swear,
But feared (divert in Heaven) a Violence
On your dear Life.

'Twas a rash Breath indeed,
All killing as a Northern Blast; but now
It Is veer'd about into a Southern Gale,
With soft Showers waited --
I consent to live.
Rise, I forgive you.

Let me then kneel still!
Rich Fountain of Delight, embodi'd Rapture!
Joy gleams from thee unwasted, while I press
This Hand, I know not how, the subtle Touch
Shoots through each Vein, and tingles at my Heart.

I pardoned you, and what was harder much,
Promised to live, but on Condition both,
Which once Transgrest makes the Obligation Void,
Resigns me back to Death, and you to my Displeasure:
As therefore you regard my Life and Favor
Be punctual to perform --

I will remember
Though I should drink dull Lethe dry, let Seas
Forget to Ebb and Flow, the Spheres their Tunes,
The Sun his Roads, the Elements their Duties,
Of you forgotten, let me perish, when
I Am guilty of a first Neglect!

Till then,
My grateful Heart for you shall entertain
The kindest thoughts that Women's Love suggests;
Each Day's State-task shall give me one soft Hour,
My own entirely, which I will devote
To Solitude and tender Thoughts of you.

I sink, I sink! intoxicate with Joy!
Like Inspired Priests I reel with Ecstasie!

All I exact for this I will sum up
In one Command, which must not be disputed,
That to retrieve my Honor you would remove,
And take this Hour a last eternal Leave.

Ha! said you Last, Last and Eternal Leave?
You kindle me into Transport, and then
To Death you chill me in the heat of Rapture!
It Is Barbarous, Queen, to sport with wounded Hearts,
And spread a Toil for harmless cred'lous Love:
'Twere Woman's Fraud to have ruined with your Smiles,
But to betray with Tears, the Crocodile's.
The injunction seemed impossible, but now
I shall obey! -- You have your Wish, for I
Shall never intrude into your Presence more.

Help Amarante! generous Prince return.

What mean you by this cruel Charity?
You stretch me on the Rack, and when I faint,
My drooping Spirits with Cordials you Restore,
Revive, but oh! to hold me still in Pain.

And could you then believe my Rigor, ha?
Blind Pity leads my Piety astray! --
'Twas cruel to tax me with Cruelty:
If you must needs accuse, charge Fate -- I would
If Destiny -- it is false, I never will --
Tormenter hence -- with no Reply but Sighs
He yields to the harsh Command -- that mournful Glance
Darts to my Soul his Grief; I cannot bear't,
Stay Prince, my Love! -- I rave, haste Amarante,
Shield me from Ruin, snatch me, bear me, fly!

Thus in Loves winding Mazes we are Toiled,
Mourn our hard Fate, yet still we keep the Round;
We rave of Wounds, yet still indulge the Pain;
And whilst we curse our Bondage, hug the Chain,

To Agrigent my trusty Officer
With these Dispatches to the Ambassadors;
Tell 'em their last advices were most Welcome;
That nightly I expect their promised Forces,
Which we will receive to the Citadel. Dispatch.
Thus far with prosperous Gales my Course I Have steered,
And now the Port's in view. Come no cross Gust!
My Fears grow with the approaching Land, for still
The Waves beat roughest near the Shore.
I Am shockt to meet thee here, my Sorc'ress? or
Some Emissary Demon in her Shape?
Speak briefly the Contents of thy dark Errand.

Soft, my projecting Son, by subtlest Magic
Invisibly I hither am arrived.
Think not that to my Cell I am confined,
But range the Streets unseen, frequent Assemblies,
And in the sultry Halls infection breathe:
Nay sometimes busy at the sacred Shrines,
With Prodigies t'amuse the zealous Crowd,
With anxious Jealousies enrage their Minds,
'Till in wild Uproar the whole State's embroiled.

But on what mischief bound arriv'st thou now?

Anon there will be Bloodshed in this place,
A Deed will much conduce to thy Designs:
In The Air I Will hang unseen to Gorge the Steams,
And suck the Vapors from the Vital Gore.

Thou led'st me into Treason, bear me through,
In pensive Moods
I Am tempted to undo what I have done,
To Tack and seek the safe Point whence I sailed.

No it is impossible, you are launcht too far,
And must resolve to brave the Billows now.

I fear the Throne which I with Blood must stain
Will prove a slippery Seat, for what should let
But Villainy resolved and bold as mine,
May take the Path which I to Greatness forced,
'Till by Usurpers the Usurper fall?

Therefore soon as thou art possessed of the power
See thy Confed'rates bleed, that none survive
T'upbraid thy Greatness with their treacherous Aids,
And claim like Pirates each his share of Spoil.

I Will sacrifice 'em to the murmuring Crowd,
With public Justice my ambition gild,
Shower Gifts among the Crowd, make Riot flow,
'Till they have drowned their discontents in Wine.

But that without control thou may possess
The Tyranny, my Drudges I Will employ
To frame with their best Arts a Bracelet for thee,
Which whilst thou wear'st it locked on thy left Arm,
Treason shall never annoy thee, Sword and Poison
In vain attempt; Nature alone have power
Thy Substance to dissolve, nor she her self
'Till many a Winter Shock has broke thy Temper.

Medea for her Jason less performed!
My greatning Soul aspires to range like thee,
In unknown Worlds, to search the Reign of Night.
Admitted to thy dreadful Mysteries,
I should be more then Mortal.

Never my Cell,
('Among circl'ing Rocks in Form a Theater)
Lies a snug Vale.

With horror I have viewed it,
It Is blasted all and bare as the Ocean Beach,
And seems a Round for Elves to Revel in.

With my Attendants there each waining Moon
My dreadful Court I hold, and sit in state.
And when the dire Transactions are dispatched,
Our zany Spirits ascend to make us mirth
With Gambals, Dances, Masks, and rev'ling Songs
'Till our mad Din strike terror through the Wast,
Spreads fair and wide to the Cliffs that bank the Main,
And scarce is lost in the wide Ocean's Roar.

Thou sooth'st my black Blood with a horrid pleasure,
That through my dark thoughts darts a gloomy Joy.

Here seated by me thou shall view the sports,
Whilst Demons kiss thy foot and swear thee Homage.
But hush! -- Our malcontent with lowering Brow
Draws near, resolved on the dire generous Deed'
Away; the mischief now is grown so ripe
'Twill work it self t'an Head without our aid.

Farewell, remember the enchanted Bracelet!
Not more the Crown I covet then that Chain.
That gloomy lowering Brow presages well.
His Discontent at the amorous Princes stay
Is grown too troublesome for his blunt Soul
To bear concealed -- the Prince himself draws near,
I Will leave them and expect the wished event.

Why should I stifle my resentment longer?
I can at worst but give him bloody proof
Of my sincerity, if he impeach
The freedom I assume, of rage or rudeness,
If to persuade, Friendship and Reason fail,
I Will bleed, and with my dying Breath prevail.
My Lord --

What would my Friend?

You loved me once.

Religion has no greater truth, and when
I love thee not, perish my life and honor.

Bold in your friendship then I warn you Sir
To summon all your Temper to receive
What he that loves you best fears to deliver.

Thou labour'st with my Fate, for what pale tidings
Am I thus cautiously prepared?

I come Sir to accuse to you your self,
To inform you how your dearest Fame lies sick,
Your Foes insulting while your Subjects murmur.
Excuse Sir your plain dealing Friend --

Proceed --

Our last dear Stake lies in your hand to play,
Which managed wisely may recover yet.
All we have lost to Fate,
And raise our sleeping Glory from the Grave.

Gently my Friend, I feel each wakening Pulse
Start and beat nimbly at the name of Glory.

Ripe Glory waits us in proud Albion's Plains,
And withers whilst the season we neglect,
And give our Harvest Suns to slumber.

Ha!

Each gentle breeze that over your Navy breaths,
Sighs as it flies, and Murmurs at our stay.

It Is too severe! cruel Asaracus
Has my firm Soul but one weak tender part,
And your keen censures levelled all at that?
Why are these Arms that often have swept the Files,
Returned with Standards filled, and bloody Bays,
Denied the transport of a short embrace?

His tender passion starts at my approach;
It bleeds, but I must pierce it deeper yet:
Boldly the needful caution I will utter,
As in a treacherous Labyrinth you stray,
Lost in delight, and pleasantly destroyed,
Whilst lulled asleep in your false Circe's charms
In vain Fames Trumpet sounds you to the Field.

Die kindling rage! like Thunder struggle, yet
I Will stifle thee, and choke thy laboring Fire.
It Is dead -- draw near Asaracus, and give
A heedfull Ear to what thy Prince delivers;
If any dark disaster or mistake
Tempt thee hereafter to suspect my Friendship,
Call to remembrance this eternal Proof --
Thou did revile the Queen, her Brutus heard
And yet forgave the Blasphemy, at once
The best of Friends and most ungrateful Lover.

My Heart dissolves -- But nature sink e're I
Indulge his Frailty and permit his Ruin.
But though your dear-bought Laurels you permit
To fade, slight courting Honors, yet consider
This noble Spirit defrauded by your stay
Of Empire, though by Nature formed to Reign.

Dread Sir it is in my Blood and I must Reign,
Can brook your sacred self alone above me:
Hourly I Will thrive in Fame, increase in Glory,
To fill your Throne when you remove to the Gods.

Excuse this Heat, a spark of your own Fire
That once glowed bright, though now in Embers hid,
But fanned with such Breath needs must blaze again.

Even when a Child and under Women's care,
Whilst through the Casements I beheld our Youth
By Prince Cleanthus mustered near the Palace,
I viewed 'em over, gazed on their dazzling Crests,
Their wondrous Scarfs and Javelins tip't with Gold,
Then sighed and swelled methought as big as They!
But when their Squadrons joined in sportive Fight
I flamed, and turning, in the Arras spied
A glaring Panther wrought to the Life, then drew
My Ivory Sword, and tilted at his Breast.

This growing Gallantry with Pride I view,
But must conceal my Joy -- Retire Locrinus.
Friend, press no more thy lost Advices, for
I Am sworn to live the Queen's and cannot desert her.

Ha! so resolved! then to my last Reserve.
Sir, be not so enamored on Perdition,
Your stock of Fame is large, but judged declining;
The Purchase cost you dear, the blood of Heroes
Is sold too cheaply for a Woman's smiles.

And have I then through Floods and Fire sought Glory,
Followed the glittering Guide through Death's dark Passes,
To be at last charged with declining Valor?
And too, the black Reproach shot from a Tongue
That has sworn Friendship to me -- I am wrapped
In Phrenzy, help Asaracus! the Storm
Grows Mad, nor can I ruleth' undsteady Helm!

To your excess of Passion for the Queen
We would impute the fault you make in Glory,
Not that you fear the Arms of Albion.

Are these then the surmizes of my Slaves?
Whose vile Necks from the Grecian Yoke I freed,
And is Asaracus of the Faction too?
I Am pleased that their Allegiance they have abjured,
Given me pretense to shake off their vile Empire;
I Will condescend to Rule this Herd no more,
Nor with such Refuse tempt the Albion War,
By great Iulus's Soul I will not.

Then
By great Iulus's Soul you must confess
More then a Woman's weakness.

That again!
Hell! said you weakness? -- and meant Cowardice?
Villain, be mean, recall that inf'mous Breath,
Recant, forswear't, Lie for thy Life or perish!

It works, and the more swelling now his Rage,
He will retreat to a lower Ebb of pity.

This stubborn silence is a plain confession!
Base as thou art I spare to spill thy Blood
'Cause thou were once the sharer of my Breast,
And my too cred'lous Soul believed thee Brave.
With much content my self I flattered long,
Thought my Breast rich, possessed of a true Friend,
But oh 'twas Fairy Wealth, a dream of Treasure,
That waking leaves me destitute and poor.
Traitor, the meaning of that threatening Steel?
Here, strike the Breast thou have so long deceived.

Yes Prince I Will strike -- your Heart -- that Heart of yours
That Is in my Bosom lodged.

Rash Soldier hold.
And e're thou fall'st unriddle this dark Action.

In vain you would prevent a second Wound;
This Arm in Brutus's service never struck
And failed to kill.

Who wait? Physicians hither, fly.

Draw near my Lord and let me bath your Feet
In the remains of Blood spent in your Service!
We have e're now waded in Gore together.
Can you forgive my bold presuming Language?
I should not have indulged my Tongue that freedom
Had I designed the Rudeness to survive.
Since nothing could Divorce you from the Queen
Pardon your Soldier's Zeal, that could not live
To see your Tide of Glory at a Stand.

Insult not over thy wretched Master's Guilt,
My shame's so Monstrous that to shun
The opprobrious Spectacle, my Friend
Withdraws disdaining to eternal Night.
Now Emp'ricks muster your best Arts to save
A Life more precious then the World's great Soul;
Know Slaves you have no middle Path to take,
Restore or wait my Hero to the Dead.

Vex not dear Friends my Wound in vain, it is Mortal,
My Heart works slowly and my Pulses sleep.
Your Hand my Lord -- with this cold Kiss I seal it.
May't prove resistless as the Thund'rers,
Snatch Crowns from Europe's Monarchs, grasp their Scepters,
Knit in one Empire the divided World.

Live my Asaracus to see me Vanquish
My Conqu'rer Love, I Will rage and break the Toil.

Speak, how shall I report of our Affairs
To your departed Heroes where I go?

Bear not to the other World my black disgrace;
We Will force our way from this enchanted Coast,
We Will sail to Night.

Our Countrey's Gods protect you.
Your Fleet's refitted, by my care prepared,
The Wind presents, the Full Moon gives a Day,
And swells her Tides to waft you from the Sound.
Farewell my generous Lord! my Friends farewell!
Thus far your Toils I have accompanied,
Fate part us here.

Spare him ye Deities for one hour more!
And then to Eternity he is yours!
One tender word more my Asaracus,
Do not so tamely yield! grapple with Death
And break from Fate to your lost Friend's Relief!
Oh let me breathe my Soul into that Wound,
And quicken thy cold Clay! I Will tear my Heart
To fill the fatal Breach! oh, oh, oh!
Withdraw and leave me to compose my Thoughts.
Give notice to the Fleet we sail to Night.
Said I to Night! forsake the Queen to Night!
Forsake! oh Fate! the Queen! to Night forsake her!
My word is past, it is given, and those pale Lips
With silent Oratory plead my Promise.
She Is here! I never shunned those Eyes before.

Do You fly me Prince? -- but it is not strange
To see the happy shun the wretched -- but
Unhappy as I am you made me so,
And may dispense to view the Griefs you gave.

You call him happy whom the damned would pity;
Despairing Ghosts that yell in lightless Flames,
Would stand aghast to hear my sufferings told,
Reflect, and grow more patient of Damnation.

Can you have any cares concealed from me?
Repeat to me the story of your Grief^,
And I Will recite the tragic Tale of mine.
Thus we will beguile the Time with mutual Plaints,
Together Mourn as once we Smiled together.

My Pain is but prolonged whilst I dissemble
The struggling Secret, for it must have Birth!
In my wan Look the fatal Message read,
Whose horror like a Spell ties up my Tongue:
Madam, Our Destiny's implacable,
We must -- Oh it is Impossible! and yet
We must --

What?

-- Die, like our Ancestors.

Your pardon Prince, this might have been expressed
With less Formality.

Is It nothing then
To be reduced to Earth, to sleep in Dust
Without one dream of Love? -- it will out.

These broken Sounds have meanings of Importance.
For, like a pensive Ghost you labor with
Some Secret which you seem prepared to tell,
But when my expectation's raised withdraw.

It shall have passage though it rend my Breast!
Rackt to confess, Fate's summons I pronounce,
A sound more terrible then Death, Divorce,
For we must part to Night and meet no more.

Ah! Prince this mirth was cruel and ill-timed,
The sportive Fright too deeply might have pierced
My timorous tender Breast; it was not prudent,
Suppose I had believed you -- and Expired.

Now Fate confess, was ever Man of Woes
Distressed like me? forced to accuse my self
Of broken Faith to her whom I deceive.
Oh! Madam, 'twas a fatal Truth I uttered,
See where my generous Friend self-slaughter'd lies
'Cause I had quitted my pursuit of Arms,
Which he conjured me with expiring Breath
To reassume, then to the Gods conveyed
My Vows Irrevocable.

Ah! Faithless!

Convey her gently to the Bed of State.
Confusion! Furies! how am I oppressed!
One kind Pang more, kills me and gives me Rest.

MY Lords, you are arrived though unexpected
Most seasonably: Fortune her self conspires
In our Design, and Fate is of our Plot.

Our King conceived new flames at our return,
His slighted Love converted to Revenge,
For having work't him into thirst of Blood
We told the Circumstances of our Project,
How you on just resentment had engaged
To render us the Citadel by Night.

And he approved of the Conspiracy?

By all the Memphian Deities he swore
'Twas such an exquisite Design,
That e're these Calends pass we should effect it,
Or forfeit our projecting Heads.

No more.
We Will do it e're cold Boots fetch his Round;
The Day Star shall rise wondering at the Change
This Night creates in the Syracusian State.
The Conscious Moon smiles on our Enterprise,
And guilds our dark design with her best Rays:
Beside, the Prince is from the Queen divorc't,
And with his Powers sails off at the next Flood.
Speak Lords, where have you lodged your Ambuscade

In The Desert.

Your number?

A complete Brigade.
Beside three Manipli culled from our Libyan Squadrons.

Passed ye the Fenns secure?

We took the upper Marches by the Cliffs.

Unseen by the Scouts on our Frontiers?

Our last was a Night March.

At the third Watch lead up your Forces
To Saturn's Gate on the North side,
Which wide with drawn Percullis shall receive you.
Be punctual.

As meeting Lovers.

My thoughtfull Head is with projecting pained,
But when I Have bound my Temples with a Crown,
I shall have ease: in the Registers of Fate
I am writ King already, but I Have yet
A stream of Blood to ford e're I assume
The Imperial Robe; -- be that then the distinction
'Twixt Soziman and vulgar Potentates,
To wear his Ermyns of a scarlet Dye.

Off -- Loose me or I Will scatter ye to Air!
Must I be fettered? stop an Earthquake's shock,
Not Typhon's Load shall press my fury down;
I Will toss the burning Mount inverted up,
And with ascending Thunder fright the Spheres.

O check this Rage or 'twill ferment to Madness.

Where dwells despair? show me the way to Fate,
The readiest Road! O for a Precipice
Whose hanging Brow o'relooks the foaming Flood,
There, decked in Robes of State, Sceptered and Crowned
I Will plunge, and bury in the unfathomed Deep
Each glittering Badge of wretched Majesty.

Where will this Passion drive? hear me dread Queen
For Syracuse's sake, your own, the Gods,
Temper this violence, and shun distraction!

Proved false? it is slander and can never be!
No, he has sworn and wept, and wept and sworn,
The List of Deities was for his Oaths
Too scant, the Years, Days, Hours, and Minutes, all
Were numbered out in Vows!
If false, he is perjured by the whole Creation.

Yet hear --

And he is false, as Jason false, forsworn,
Teach me Medea's Arts! for my Revenge
The Globe shall Wreck, and Nature be in Pangs.
He Sails! see, where the Fugitives proud Barque
Cleaves the curled Wave, steady before the Wind,
They scudd, and leave the Dolphin's Leagues behind.
But there are Gods! there are! -- the Surges rise,
And Boreas posts to the Fray, they toss, they toss,
Erynnis fires the Stern! now Flood or Flame!
They burn, ha, ha, how looks the Adulterer now?

Thus with my grovelling Limbs I Will stop your way,
Indulge your Passion, give your Fury scope,
But tread me first to death, then glutt of Grief,
And rave without Control.

O Amarante!
Thy Love pursues me, though forsook of Heaven.
Forgive my Rage, too slight for my Distress.
Oh Heavens! no intermission of my Pain?
I can sustain no more, Oh my sick Soul!

Stop, as you prize your Amarante's life.
She dies, if you relapse again to Rage --

Ah! spare that Breast and I Will compose my Griefs,
Give me a moments space to hush the Storm.
Look, now I Am tame, calm as frozen Flood!
Nay I can smile -- And yet a Tear will steal.
Let Us talk my Girl, for now I can discourse;
Begin -- Or would thou that I give a Theme?
Then descant on the Perjuries of men.

I would prescribe a Cure, not feed your Sorrow.
Forgive my busy Love that has contrived
Without your knowledge to redress your Griefs.

Redress my Grief? 'Twas busy Love indeed!
Call back the darted Cane, restore
The forced Spark to its Flint, unite again
The gathered Rose to its stock and make it grow.

I Have sent for the famed Prophetess, that keeps
Her dark abode in the Diana Vale:
With her I will advise of your distress;
Awed Nature truckles to her Mystic Arts,
Her Spells control the Winds, rebuke the Spheres,
Her Tyranny to the inmost Soul extends,
She sways our Passions, and to love or loath
Is in her Gift -- but see she has surpised us.

Our Household Deities be first Atton'd
With Prayers and Incense, then we will prove her Art.
To the Distressed one Refuge still remains,
None are extremely wretched that dare Dye!

With halting Pace at length we are arrived,
Nor would have been at pains, but to introduce
Confusion, Famine, Drought, Infection, War;
The blasted Grass will show where we have Journey'd,
And point Destruction out the readiest Road.

The Batts before us in the Twy-light played,
And wanton Meteors tumbled over the Lawns.

A stately Pile! -- Megera's Torch set fire to it.

To work, to work, our Sorcerie's Masterpiece.
Now quit ye well, or never ply Furnace more.

Our first Task is to Desecrate the place,
And drive the Tut'lar Genius from his Charge,
That naught defeat our Charms.

As through the Portico we passed,
With Scorpion's Blood the Lares I defiled,
And on their Necks hung Chains invisible.

I fixed a cross Spell at the Palace Gate,
And Conscious of its force the Statues fell.

To East and West, North and South Points disperse,
And puff th'Enchanted Powders from your Flasks,
Whilst here in the Center I reside,
And from my hollow Breast pour Mystic Rhimes
That wake the slumbring Demons into Yells.

The Ground's unhallowed, and our Art works free,
But ha! Why droops the Mistress of our Spells?
You Are sad and clouded with a sudden Gloom.

Daran long since forewarned me to expect
An end of my dark Reign, when I should meet
Two snowy Kids milking a jet black Damm,
Which fatal Omen I beheld this Morn'.
Beside, our Caldron where our Drugs we steep,
At Midnight fell to boiling without fire;
Our Cell of late has often been hung with Dew,
And seemed to weep at our approaching Fate.

They Are vain Portents, our Magic still holds good.

Last Night a Village Shrew in Labor fell,
With a slight Charm I checked the hastening Birth,
In vain Lucina was invok't, till I
Dissolved my Spell, and then the Blouze was Laid.

A Wood-man as I gathered Herbs, reviled me;
But I observed him while he fixed a Ginn
Of steel indented to entrap the Wolf,
At first Cock-Crow I drew him from his Bed,
In The Engine locked him fast and left him yelling.

As from Elorus Cliffs I viewed the Flood,
Two Rival Tritons rose with Lances armed,
And fiercely at each other ran a Tilt;
They bled, and with their Gore the Sea-weed stained,
Which at low Ebb I gathered, a choice Drugg,
Whose virtue future practice must discover.

Whilst pensive near a Pathless Vale I sat,
A sportive Vapor rolled along the Glin,
Its wild Capriches caused me to suspect
Some frolic Demon acting in the Mist,
Which summoned by my Art t'appear, came forth,
Taught me new Spells, and hid in the fog again.

Proceed we then to finish our black Projects.
View here, till from your green distilling Eyes
The poisonous Glances Center on this Bracelet,
A fatal Gift for our projecting Son;
Seven Hours odd Minutes has it steept in the Gall
Of a vile Moor Swine-rooted from his Grave.
Now to your bloated Lips apply it round,
And with the infectious Dew of your black Breaths
Complete its balefull force.

Uh, uh, uh.

Now to your several Charges each repair,
E're second Crow expect me at the Cell;
But look you charm the Desert as ye pass:
For if Wolf howl, Fox bark, or Badger yelp,
You shall be Tenter-stretcht and hung in the Sun.

Uh, uh, uh,

O Expectation! Torture of the mind!
Two hours, no more, divide me from my wishes.
But oh, how many minutes make those hours?
Time's sand falls grain by grain to him that waits
For Empire -- I Am informed the Queen has summoned
The Sorc'ress to consult -- She Is here.

There Son.
The King of Shades no richer Present drew
From his dark Store to appease his Ravished Bride:
It makes thee for seven Lustres more Immortal.

I am confused with Joy, but when I wake
From the Ecstasy --

Wave thy vain thanks, and heed
The Charge I give; to Night at the third Watch
A powerful Constellation Reigns, till then
Forbear to fix it to thy longing Arm.
Away, the Queen returns.
'Twere a mean mischief and below my Art,
To ruin him till in close view of Empire,
But to prevent him in the Nick, just shooting
With the last stretch on his hard hunted Prey,
Is worthy of my Skill, and can almost
Provoke me against my Contract to a Smile.

In vain we ply the Gods with slighted Incense!
Some Prodigy lurks in each Nook to fright me;
Even now the Altar shook as I approacht,
As from the Lavar to bedew the Floor
I heaved a Bowl, the Crystal Element
Converted in my Hand to putrid Gore.
O Prophetess powerful in Mystic Rites,
Be kind, and with thy sacred Art assist
A suppliant Queen, and thou shall be my Goddess.

How, Lady Venus, is your Mars proved false?
Drought on my poisonous Drugs if ought I do
TO oblige thee Queen, but for the dear Delight
Of mischief, I Will assist thee, teach thee how
To mould his form in Wax by Art prepared
Of Viper's fat, and Gumm of Stygian Pines,
Which on a slow fire with due Rites dissolved
Shall waste his Entrails, melt his Reins to a Gelly,
For Magic uses Sovereign Ingredient.

Incarnate Devil!

Or if this Method like thee not, I Will teach thee
With blood of Dragons to inscribe his Name,
And stabb each Letter with envenomed Needles.
That shall to his thinking wound his Body over
With Hornet's stings, there is sport, ho, ho.

I seek not thee to enforce his Love,
But quench my own.
And therefore I entreat thee set a Spell
To keep him Port-bound, till I shall have weaned
My froward Passion.

Port-bound shall he be!
I Will lash the Coasts with such fierce Gusts from Sea,
It Is odds I wreck his Navy in the Bay:
Nor without hope by the by to endanger too
The Towers of Syracuse, that guild the Clouds;
But to my Charm -- Thus Circ'ling on my Staff.
Daran be'est thou far or near,
Approach, I summon thee to appear.
Ha! what art thou? a Spirit of Earth or Air?
For size thou shoud'st be one of Oberon's Train,
A Fairy Elf; but I remember not
TO have seen thee in the Ring on Rev'ling Eves,
Nor at the general Banquet in the Vale
By Moonlight; Dwarfin speak thy Name, and why
Thou do usurp the Office of my Spirit.

I Am sent to inform thee that the Powers below
Demand thee, for thy Reign expires to Night.

Poisons and boiling Sulphur! hark the Spirit,
The Season's drawing on, permit me Live
To blast one Harvest more.

It is denied.

To force at least an Earthquake when I sink
To lay this stately Citadel in heaps.

You may not, but this Night it shall become
A Scene of Treason, Rapes, and Massacres.

I shall not perish Singly then.

I Have done.
And to my Charge return: at the third Watch
Expect me.

Queen glorious tidings! bless the lucky hour!

What says thy Art?

This Night compleats thy Ruin -- keep the Secret.

Pernicious Hagg! a Guard here, seize the Witch.
Vanished? each minute of this dreadful Night
Teems with some Miracle; where-e're I turn
Fate looks me in the Face.

Madam, the Prince.

To your Posts Sirs, and make ready to weigh off
With the young Flood, expect me soon Aboard --
I Have sworn, but dare not venture to her presence
Till with repeated Vows I Am armed a new.
Madam --

Why in this Garb my Lord?

Agues and Fevers! she seems ignorant
To put me on the Torture of repeating
What with more pain I have already told,
Then raving Sibylls utter Oracles --
Think it not rudeness that I seize this Hand.
How I adore this Goodness -- yet I wish
I had not --

Had not?

O there is Magic in it.

Then I Will withdraw't.

No, for you snatch my life too with it.

Why do you then complain?

It fires my blood!
Revives the dear remembrance of those Joys,
That never! never -- Oh my Heart breaks.

You are discomposed my Lord, please you retire
And rest?

'Twas a light swimming in my Head,
And to divert it I was forced to move.
Your pardon Madam.

But my demand my Lord, why in this Garb?

Excuse and pity me the Drudge of Fate,
Fate wantonly our Alban State o'rethrew,
And then with the vast Ruins cumbred me;
Seven tedious years have I the weight sustained,
And must sustain till on proud Albion's Shore
I pour the Load and shake the burd'ned Soil.

My swelling Passions crowd each other's way,
And pressing all for utterance, all are mute.

Empire could never have drawn me from your Feet
Were I the sole Adventurer in the War,
But thousands run the fortune of my Play,
And giving up the Game I break them all.

When will the striving Thunder break and roar?

Long have I strayed from the rough Tracks of Honor
To revel in the looser Vales of Love,
Caress't like soft Endymion by a Goddess,
But now my glorious Toils I reassume;
Once more in Arms, new Listed under Fame,
And with as many Oaths stand re-ingag'd
As Heaven has Powers -- for I invok't 'em all.

Go then Ungrateful, False, Inhumane, go,
Seek, search your Fairy Kingdoms through the Floods;
Trust the false winds as I have trusted thee,
And perish by 'em as by thee I perish.

If like the Rocks relentless I must stand.
Make me, indulgent Gods, as Deaf as they!

Curse on my ill-timed Hospitality,
I should have joined with the angry Gods, and Fired
His Pirate Fleet, when storm-driv'n on my Coast,
And Massacred his Legions in a Night.

Now Heavens your Aid to fix my wavering Heart --

Yet perjured Prince at least I will detain
This living Copy of your dear false Self
To sooth my sorrows with the sad remembrance
Of fatal pleasures past.

Your pardon Madam,
I cannot lose my share in the Albian War;
The Inhabitants are all of monstrous Size,
Like those huge Sons of Earth that stormed the Heavens,
I long to engage a Foe above my reach,
And dart my Rapier at a Giants Heart.

Your Father's wrongs will end me soon, and then
My Crown shall fall on you.

I cannot wait.
Let dull Heirs watch the uncertain fall of Power;
I Would force my Fortune, win the Crown I wear.

Think thou the Gods, if thus I am deserted,
Will wink at such ingratitude?

Dread Queen,
We take no final Farewell; when we have fixed
Our Reign in Albion, we will invade the Gauls,
Then scowr the Hesperian Borders to this Isle,
Till Conquering back we visit you again --

Lost Queen! both Gods and Men to thy requests
Are deaf -- Once more I will attempt this Rock.
The Neighboring Princes for your sake rejected
On my forsaken Realm will pour their War,
And amongst their Trophies Lumber drag me chained,
With whose bright presence once they coveted
To grace their Thrones, and honor at my Feet
Their Crowns -- But let 'em come, for to preserve
My Dignity I Will die immured with Fire,
These Golden Roofs shall burn my Funeral Pile;
Then as you sail in dead of Night, survey
From your tall Stern our flaming Syracuse
Relentless, make advantage of our Fate,
And by our blazing Temples Steer your Course.

Away thou foolish Utensil of War,
I Will give my scattered Laurels to the Wind,
Nor die me more in slaughter -- Fame can boast
No Charms like these, nor with such bliss reward.

The grateful Brutus meant not to desert
His hospitable Queen in her distress;
My conscious Heart told me 'twas but Pretense
Yet -- Trust me Prince, 'twas cruel to pretend!
Whence that sad Cry?

From your Argaces Cell;
Thrice has his discontented Genius groaned.

'Twas to reprove and summon us to part.
Ah Prince, in vain our Loves with Fate contend;
Let Us tack and stemm the stormy Tide no more.
Improve this Season to oppose your Passion,
And bank against it now whilst it is in the Ebb.

In The Ebb? witness the o'reflowings of my Heart,
Witness the Labor of each panting Nerve,
My glowing Art'ries and fermenting Blood,
My Dreams all Night, and Musings all the Day
The innumerable Deaths of every hour --

No more! I am convinced you Love -- too well!
Yet want the power to enjoin you Love me less.

O Rapture! killing Sweets and bleeding Joy:

More Prodigies! then Destiny's resolved
On our Divorce -- And I at last resolve it too!
I Will take the Courage which this minute gives,
And while my Heart will serve me, say -- Farewell!

Stay Queen, oh turn! Love's Farewell cannot pass
So smoothly off! a thousand thousand sighs
Should interrupt and break the killing Sound,
Kisses should stifle it, Tears drown it, oh, oh! --
Think not when banished from your sight, I Will toil
For Empire, no, to the utmost North I Will roam,
Where no kind Sun shall thaw the Congealed Brook
To humor with soft Murmurs my Complaints;
Stretched on its Bank I Will knit to the Ground I press,
By the neglected Locks Frost-bound to Earth!

You must not leave me with such dire Resolves,
You must my Brutus promise to part hence,
And live removed from your afflicted Queen,
Yet promise to Live happy too, you must,
It Is all I shall enjoin you for my sake
In your Eternal Absence.

Blood and Fire!
I am distracted -- such another Sound
And then your wretched Brutus is no more.

Shield me ye Powers, turn Prince and view your Friend,
Threatening and pointing to his blushing Wound.

Asaracus! -- that e're that Form should fright me!
Pronounce, what means this Visit from the Grave?
Was then our Friendship of so strong a Tie
That Death could not Divorce? Approach cold Shade,
And in my Bosom's warmth I Will cherish thee.
Dissolved, withdrawn disdaining from my sight
E're Fates important Message was Delivered!

His speaking Frowns his Embassy expressed,
And the sad Summons I Have sworn to obey.

Ha, sworn? recall inhumane Queen, recall
The winged Oath, e're it reach the Gods.

It Is fled.

Must then a rash Vow interpose
'Twixt me and Life? Love spreads a Feast, but you
Fix Harpy Vows to drive me from the Dainties!

Now sacred Powers if e're you will assist
Poor laboring Virtue, my resolves secure!

Permit at least your Slave the privilege
To breathe his last Groans here!
Nor shall the doleful Cry offend you long,
For grovelling at your Feet his Griefs and he
Will rage themselves into eternal sleep.

Never was such a Spectacle of Woe!
Time's self must stand surpised at our Distress,
And stop his Course to gaze on us as Wonders!
Rise Prince, for we must yield to Destiny,
Scattered and driven by an Head-sea of Fate;
Again I swear, that Sun shall be my Last
That next beholds your Navy in the Bay,
Take a quick Leave, or you resolve my Death.

Oh Love!

O Death!

With what Regret I leave these Hills of pleasure!
Mysterious Worlds where all the Seasons meet,
The warmth of Summers, and the Winter's Snow.

Enough! dismiss me from the Rack -- Adieu!

One dear last Taste of Bliss.

Take, snatch it and away.

Yet one more Everlasting Last.

I dare not for my Soul -- farewell.

Kind, Cruel Queen Eternally farewell.

Racks, Daggers, Poison, -- Lead me Amarante.

Compose this Passion: whither?

Any whither.
To a Desert, Death, Eternal Shades, Oh Torture!

This is my Dawn of Power, the approaching Glory
Dazles and wraps me into Ecstasy.
The lucky Minute's come, now for my Bracelet,
Which whilst I wear it locked to my left Arm
Treason shall never annoy me, thus I bind
My safety to me -- My Ambassadors
Should now arrive --
Thy hasty looks prevent thy speech,
And tell me they are come.

They wait with all their Troops at the North Gate,
Where I have placed thin Guard, and those made privy
To our Design; the rest will be surpised
And yield to unequal Power.

Haste and admit them.
Conduct 'em to the Cell, where they may seize
Their Royal Prize. I Will meet ye there.
Now comes my Transport! Ha, what sudden Cramp
Distorts my Nerves? I burn! my Heart bodes Death!
Hell, am I then mocked with a dream of Empire,
A Pageant Prince? the Monarch of an Hour?
Pernicious Beldame! it is the Bracelet! Oh
I Am poisoned! wrapped with hissing Snakes about,
Stung in each Pore -- Furies and threatening Fiends
Around me glare -- The Stars shoot madly down,
It Thunders, the o're-charg'd Clouds break, break and hurl
A shower of Sulphur on my Head! Fire, Fire!

Room, room, or I shall burst, my Breast will rend
And scatter Wild-fires! ha, who named the Prince?
Spite of our inauspicious Stars he is brave,
Warlike and Soft -- I cannot breathe without him.
Fly Amarante e're he reach the Port,
And die to hang the Heavier on his Feet.
Bid him return, the Queen has given him leave --
Rash Maid come back! Is Amarante grown
So base as to officiate in my shame?
O raging misery! when shall I have Rest?
My sorrows sleep? they will never, never sleep;
Why this unkind Delay? did I not charge you
Fetch back the Prince?

Yes, and he shall return.
Rather then Sail, his Fleet shall burn in the Bay.

Stay, I conjure you stay -- What cruel zeal
Prompts you to stab afresh my bleeding Honor?
Convey me to some distant Desert shade,
Where I may rove through th'unfrequented Gloom,
And fright the listening Satyrs with my Cries.

Soft Music, and complaining Songs may calm
This Rage, I Have known it a successful Charm.
Bid the sad forsaken Grove
To sigh for ever, sigh as much as I.
Bid the Dew fall, and the Sky weep apace,
Weep like the Queen of Love:
It cannot be more show'ry then her Face.
Ah hapless Deity,
And still more wretched 'cause she may not Die.
Can there be further joy in the Celestial store,
Now my best Heaven Adonis is no more,
He is no more, no more!
Hark, methinks I hear each Tree
Murmur in Parts as sighing Breezes rise
And make (whilst Time their nodding Branches keep)
A mournful Symphony.
The Skies too find a thousand Eyes to weep.
Ah you deceitful Skies,
When my Adonis fell where were those Eyes?
Can there be further joy in the Celestial store,
Since the sweet Youth Adonis is no more,
He is no more, etc.

Treason, Treason! the Cittadel's betrayed,
Our Guards by the Agrigentines are surpised,
Part are corrupted and assist the Foe,
The rest in vain resist and Loyal die.

Your Cheek's rich Purple fades, your sickening Eyes
Threat'n a fatal Change! Heaven save the Queen!

My malady at last has proved my Cure,
My Griefs at last have swelled to that degree
To break my o're-charg'd Heart and give me Ease.
Death thou have shunned me long, long failed my hopes,
But now I Have seized thee, and I Will hold thee fast!

Still pale -- ha, speechless too? Cold! Dead! ah Queen
Unkindly have thou stolen from life and me!
But I Will pursue thee even to the other World,
And if Fate's malice can extend so far
Partake thy miseries there.

Let slaughter cease, all sheath your Conquering Swords.

Prostrate? Expired? then let the Conqu'rers blush!
Whilst we so busily engaged in the Fight,
Death snatched the Spoil and bore the Prize away.

O costly Pomp of horror! none stand forth
TO interpret this dumb Scene?

Here! here it heaves, but thus I give it vent;
Ha! how the Poison trickles! -- What a Crack
Was there? Again? the Icy Region breaks,
Falls clatt'ring down, the frozen Ruins tumble,
And dash the Seas to Heaven.
Sev'n Suns dart through me with their scorching Rays!
My Sinews crack! my Bones in Splinters break!
Mists, Sulfurous Mists confound and choke the Day!
Comets and fiery Specter -- the Earth yields,
We sink, plunge Headlong to Eternal Deeps.

Prodigious!

In Confusion I am lost.
For their Enterments we will first provide,
Then back to our expecting Court
With mourning Trumpets in slow Marches move,
Sad Cypress for Triumphant Laurels wear.
And Funeral Flags for Conquering Ensigns bear!

HO, ho! once more to the hated Light I come
To visit ye, and learn the Poet's Doom;
E're I could see the Fortune of his Play,
He broke my Charms and hurried me away.
The Critiques think I have usurpt their Right,
And all the mischief I have wrought to Night
Encroachment on their proper Province, Spite.
I know you do by long Prescription claim
A Privilege to Censure, Rail and Dam;
You pay for Railing, on your Charges flout,
And it is but just you take your Pen'orths out.
Hard Fate of Poets! -- but (to make it appear
Witches then Critiques more obliging are,)
Ill teach 'em the sure way to Liberty --
Let 'em henceforth each others Vouchers be;
For they are now so large a Party grown
As could with Number bear the Critiques down.
Then on our Stage, the Adventurers in Wit
Shall Trade secure,
And Triumph over the Hogons of the Pit.

