I Have made an escape as hard as one of Jupiters to see thee, Rasy; The heat
of our morning business is over; and now my Stomack's more raw and cold then
the weather; therefore prithee one half Pint of the best, if thou love me


I know thy meaning, thou shall have it Lad in a pint Pot.


An hon^st Rogue I warrant him.


Here can I drink at any time a Pint of Sack would make a Cat speak Greek or
Hebrew for a Groat


'T must be thy Grandams groat, then.


A good plain Harry, or a Besses do, or any Coin will tantamount to
four-pence


How, man?


True man; there is an Art in it will puzel all the Poets and Legerdemane -- men
living. A friend in a corner is as good as a penny in a man's Purse, I need say
no more


It Is good, to be acquainted with such a friend.


Creep e're you go; deserve him first, every man is not Froth, I nick you
there; one courtesy requires another, so much for that, ka me, ka thee


Score a pint of White Wind in the Rose there.


White Wind! we called for Sack.


Pass by his Ignorance; friend have thou a Pallat? here is to thee.


By all the Wares in my Master's shop, and my Mistresses Compter too, excellent
Sack


Hold your peace, cannot you fare well, but you must cry Roast-meat?


This Smoke is such a vapor.


Are you for a Pipe? I have right special in my Box.


Would choke a Dog I warrant it.


The best Spain affords I promise you.


I care not if I take a whiffe, -- what say thou Rasy?


I dare not, it is too soon, come, mind your drinking, one Quart more, that is
pint a piece, and we have done


Gramercy, honest Rasy; and so have at thee.


Bring a Light, and Pipes too.


Well, I shall.


Now sirrah, say I Have brought you acquainted with a trusty Trojan, one that
does prize his friend, that is such as I am, that scorns to be behind hand in
requital. If thou will be of our Society, then study that


By this hand thou know I am as prodigal of my Master's Goods as another
can be of his; If I can serve Rasy in any thing relates to our Trade he shall
command me


why, that is well said; I Will tell him so.


Pray do, I warrant him a witty fellow: I like his way of scoring White Wind
for Sack, it is ingenious, and undiscoverable


Unless the Master come into the Room, and smell into the Pot.


That Is but a hazard, and care must manage it.


Thou do inspect well.


I am not ignorant of good fellowship Froth; and have been at the like sport in
the City, when the visible Pint of Sack has past the Bar, and the merry quart
Bottle by cleanely conveyance brought in the Breeches, and dedicated to good
fellows; and now and then (as the house fills, and Company resolved to stay,) a
Quart scor'd in the Crown and brought to us in the Myter, for which the
elevated Gentlemen pay, and we pass upon Paroll, that is, to return again, and
be merry upon the like account; and these are kindnesses I meet withal


And how do thou requite 'em.


Know Froth, I hate to be ingrate, I will not boast my doing^; but while my
master has Rasons, Currants, Figs, Sugar, Nutmeg, Cloves, all sorts of Spices
and Tobacco, they shall march in Pounds and Ounces to my friends, Lads


Thou will deserve us then; come sprightly Rasey, we thirst for thee.


As I Am a Christian the b^st Gentlemen comes to the house tastes not better; and
so my love to you


Thou do well, here is one that would be one of us, and though I say it an
intelligible puppy, one will come to hand upon a good occasion; Mr. Pepper's
man the Grocer


How do you call him Gynney?


No Smoke, or what you will, but certainly his proper name is Smoaker, for that
the Pipe is never out of his mouth; however he is good natured, and true hearted


The fitter for our Company.


He swears he is so taken with thine, thou shall not want any thing his Masters
Shop affords


I thank ye, Froth knows me well enough.


And thou know me well enough Rasey:


I Rogue, we are brothers.


I hope you will entitle me too, and if you want a fourth man, I Will bring one
that is true blew, an Oyle-man's Apprentice, who shall furnish you better, and
with more variety then he that cries your Olives, your Capers, your Samphire,
your Barbaries, your Cowcumbers, your Anchoves, and your new Pickled Oysters,
and cost you nothing


By all means let us know him.


A kind soul, and will spend his Money freely too.


Or else he does nothing, -- will he Game.


I never tried him.


Now thou talk of Gaming, what is become of the little Dapper Clark, how does
he hold out


Pox take him, he won four pound of me but the other day, I hope to retreive it.


Thou have only drawn him in.


No, hang him, were he as good at Clerkship as he is at Gaming, he would get more
Money then his Hide could carry


Is he so good at it.


It is his prayers and his daily bread; and yet I know sometimes he wants a
dinner, but that is when his Mint is broke and he wants recruting; for the best
of Gamsters does not always win, and then the Rogue will spend high when he
has it, Whores a little, and keeps himself neat and trim, fit for good Company


By this hand Rasey, now we are Brothers (for I will be so whether thou will or
no) if thou be excellent at that sport, I will bring thee acquainted with
such a young fry of Apprentices thou shall want for no Commodities


By this hand I Will go snip, and so shall thou.


Agreed, agreed.


Why should not we four that is our brother Oyleman, (as yet unknown to you,)
our brother Vintner here, our brother Tapster, and Ego my own self, brother to
all, love one another? the Drapery, and the Mercery Pedees comply to cheat
their Masters in gross, to please their Concubines, ('twere Porter like to say
Whors,) and we never cheat our Masters but in parcels to please our selves and
keep up merry Society, and for ought I know our Masters are greater Cheats then
we are, what say you Brothers


A learned speech, you have hit right, --


Though we can say something as to our Callings too, it is wisdom to hold our
peace, the truth on it is, Cheating like the Wandering Jew is every where; but of
all cheats I hate your Coffee-House cheat


Why a Turk's as bad as a Jew, if not worse.


For my part I think they are principl'd alike.


But the vanity of our Nation is such, that rather then we shall cheat'em
they will bring in the devil to do it


A Song in three parts, the Jew, the Turk, and the Devil.


Troth Rasey some of your quality are served in their kind, and suffer for
their own sins, what had they to do to take another calling upon them, to
sell Ale in silver Tankerds, ordered with Sugar, and a nick name, and sell it
for 6d. a Pint, half pint? and then Beer put into a Rhenish Wine Cask and sold
for March Beer, strewn with a little Sugar at a groat a Tankerd, and all to
cozen the poor Victualler


That my Master was never guilty of.


I do not say he was.


I am coming, -- however I have a plaguey spleen at the Coffee-House that cheats
us all


No, he cheats not us, we furnish him with Tobacco, and he pays honestly, but
still he is but a Turk as the Song goes


Would I could meet with some Poet that would handle the Humors of the
Coffee-House a little, as I Am a Christian I Would be civil to him


I know one, Rasey, that does love thee dearly; I must confess he cares not
much for me, yet he will take his mornings draught in Ale, to please his
company, but Sack is his best mistress, Coffee he abhominates


Prithee bring him hither.


He has been here, and thou can not but know him.


I come, I come, -- I am more called upon, then any servant in the house; look
you there is my Groat, -- pay at the Bar, I Will take the Quart-pot down into the
Cellar


Here Is our two Groats, prithee do thee pay the Reckoning.


I will.


Deer Rasey I am thy humble servant, by this hand when next we meet I will
requite this kindness


You Rogue I must have a pound of Verina's, for a friend in the mean time.


Thou shall have it.


Come go to our house and't shall not cost thee a farthing stay all day.


I dare not do that.


YOu damm shade ver be de hoar your Metres, and de shack nape dogbolt Rog a me
man, begar dis devell Vife mind nothing in de Varld but de foke she spoil all a
de men me keep, she he a de Bed to breed leshery, and call a me men to rub her
Gumms, begar, and let me do all a de varke my self; ver be de hoar you shade


My Mistress forsooth.


Yes a dat Bish.


She is rising forsooth.


De gran pock take her pour me, vat ave you done vid de milk for de Chocolet?


It is within Sir.


Vid in, diable be vid in der be no ting in de Pan begar.


It is in the Bole forsooth.


Vat boll you shade? de boll ver dat hoar your Metres do pish.


Yes forsooth.


Fesh me de Boul hedder; it vill be day presant de Company come to de owse,
noting for them begar; call de dog Rog a my man


Yes forsooth.


O de devell? dis hoar Bish my vife no come yet? a begar; he dat marry de
Anglish woman marry the Serpent, de Snake in bosom, de devell and all, dey do
noting but keep a deire Bed and tink on dyable, vat be dis? vere be de milk you
shade


The Cat it seems has lapt it up Sir.


A de Dog, bish Cat, de shade my maid, de hoar mine vife, and the Dog hores son
my man, begar dey will undo me, fesh me de Eggs you damm shade


Yes forsooth.


Hoar, you shall no yes a forsoot, me go my self you be de lucky hoar shade you
shall no go


A body had better be out of their life then live with such a mandring hell
hound, he will find the Eggs broke too, and then I shall lead such a life all this
day. --


O diable! vere be de Eggs you shade, bish, damm bish hoar, shade vere be de
Eggs? eere be de Sells? you shade hoar vere be de Eggs


You see, they are broke sir.


Broak a, you damm shade old Nick break a your neck, pour dat broak! begar you
damm shade, de hoar my vife, and de dog Rog a my man break me to sivers, to
noting by and by; me vill no dure dis begar, take you dat varming one, two,
tree, four times


I could not help it sir.


Elpe it! begar you elp noting, -- O shack Rog my dog man, very good time ven
all my tings be spoild den you come a de luck on it


Why sir it is not so late, it is not day yet.


Begar dat be brave no day yet! dat be very fine; shacknape vill you lie abed
pour de day? begar you be no servan pour moy, Mine Trade be in de Nite* Ater de
Teefe break de owse ver ave dey to come but to de Coffee-Owse? vere come a de
young Clerks, de Prentices ven dey be drinc but to the Coffee-Owse? ver come de
Plotters, de men of design, but to de Coffee-Owse? and in de Nite; the best
time; begar dey be de best Customers too; begar dey drink mush of de Coffee,
and mush of de Chocolet begar: now be you no Rog shack dog


I am no Rogue nor no Dog.


Begar you be de Rog and de dog, you be de one, two, tree, four, sis Rogs and
de dogs, me tell you dat now


Bless me what ado is here, what is the matter?


De matter! go hang your self shade hoar, begar you be de hoar of all de Varld.


I, I, we know your words no slander.


Begar you vid dis shack dog, dis shack nape, dis ogoly cur my man and no mind
my business, de Eggs be broke, and de milk a be spild for de Chocolet


Is that it, have you made all this din for a little flatten milk, and a few
rotten Eggs, they all stood you not in three pence


No matter for dat; dough the milk be stale, de ^etter to make a de Chocolet,
dough de ^ggs be rotten dey be better for de Chocolet, and den de Sugar make
all fine begar: but you be carless, mind noting for your profit, let all de Rog
in de Town come upon you, every Barber, Fidilere, Tayleer and Tapster be all
Turks, now begar, and sell de Coffee Bougra de Anglish dey be all sheats begar,
me can live better in any place of de varld den in dis Country, me travail
every vere and no man take mine Trade from me, and dis be all long a you, may
foy, you tell my gredience to every body, pock take you for your pain


You are always so jealouse of me sweetheart.


Diable sweet art; begar you be de cunning hoar, me jealouse of you ha, ha, he,
ave me no reasons you shade, begar me ave no Chocolet pour de Company to day,
and de Coffee two tree Gallons begar de pock shack dog, de Cat sirreverence
into de Caldron, faugh, faugh, fe, fe, fe


Oh sir let it boil well, a Dog or Cats Turd is as good as the Berry it self,
'twill give a rare hogo sir, and make the drink the better


De better! dat be very fine, you make me leeve a dat, but me no care, it shall
do, -- you damm shade go your ways and knock de devil up for some Eggs and
some Milk, begar me loose vun silling by dis business, devil fesh you for a
hoar


You are a foul mouth base fellow.


Begar me took you from Dog and Bish-yard and made you de woman, and you prove
de hoar, de damm hoar a de varld


If I were never so bad I were good enough for a damned Turk.


Diable! me kick you begar unto de Devell, and make you de hoar of de House.


Good Master. --


I pray, sir. --


Let the Rogue come, the Renegado Rogue, I Will give him his Passport.


Vat, have you got your Shampians here you hoar, Bish, shade, dis be very fine.


Hang you Rascal.


How now, where is thy Husband?


Gone into the City.


How has he looked on thee since he Trapan'd us at Epsome, prithee?


With the same eyes he did before, and as lovingly faith la, only sometimes
he will tell me jestingly 'twas a wild frolique in me; and so it was indeed, we
might have been far more securely merry nearer hand


Do think he is not Jealouse?


If he be, he shows it not.


How does he speak of me?


Very well faith La; he thinks you a right honest man, and shall not loose a
penny by ye, he had rather trust you then a hundred Courtiers


I believe him, it is safer to trust one Man then a Hundred. What will thou
drink this morning


Any thing.


A Cup of Hypocras, 'twill warm thee within Wench; come kiss me, poor Rogue
do not want a Course this morning


You talk wildly, you have not slept to night well certainly. Who Is at Bar
there? Rasey bring a Cup of Hypocras for Mr. Hunt-Cliffe


I shall forsooth.


I hope dear Hunt-Cliffe you are no friend unto the Coffee-House.


I hate the Liquor perfectly, give me the Sack, it breeds good Blood.


The other is a dryer, a monstrous dryer, and the greatest enemy unto
the affairs relate unto our Sex that can be; if you love me you must hate that,
my Husband is too much addicted to it


Let fools, and Sots affect it, Wisemen slight it.


Oh Squire Hunt-Cliffe, how fares your body?


It will fare better by and by, we wait for Wine.


But new come in I protest my
Dear -- look thee, the Wine is not touched yet.

Come, here is to thee, it is Hypocras man.


I care not, I Have newly drank Coffee.


What? an enemy to thy own Calling!


Some two or three hours hence I Am for you:


I shall Sup here to Night.


And welcome too, Sir.


Some friends of mine are newly come to Town, I am obliged to Treat.


What will you have provided sir?


A douzen of Cocks, and half a douzen of Teale, as many Partridges, and a
couple of Pullets, will do the business


They shall be ready sir.


Twixt six and seven.


I like not things that run at six and sevens.


I prithee fail me not.


You have my Wife's word for it sir.


I must to Court about some special business; add this Wine to my Account.


So -- to your Account! I think you will make no Account on it, still scoring: I
never saw a penny of his Money


He brings good Company to the House, my Dear:


And always scores his part o'th Reckoning; a precious purchase, what will
begot at last by such a Customer? prithee wilt hold out


He Will pay thee all my Dear, I Will warrant it.


Nay, then I Am in a likelihood indeed to be well paid, if you be his Security.


Not so neither my Dear; his Money he says will come up very shortly.


It has been long a coming, and the truth is, would I could see it once, I have
small mind to trust him longer


As you please for that my Dear; but take my word the Gentleman's a very civil
Gentleman


I wish he prove so.


What, does you Master think to Coope me up in his Counter? faith sir no, he
takes his pleasure, and I Will take mine; let him look to his Commodities himself,
I have other Commodities in Town to look after beside his, and as I take it a
great deal better: if he calls for me when he comes in, tell him I Am gone to
see my sister Touchstone


I shall forsooth.


And I pray keep you the house, though your shoos be made of running Leather.


Yes, yes.


Sister Olive, how do thou do?


I came purposely to see you.


Wilt go along with me to the Play?


No, no, I dare not.


How dare not! art thou a fool, I Would fain see whether my Husband could bring me
to that pass or not, I believe I should break his heart first


Oh fie, do not say so.


I protest I should, why, woman we were not born to be their slaves, it is our
selves make our selves so


You talk merrily.


And so might thou, had thou not been a fool; thy own good nature first
subjected thee; and now thy Husband keeps thee at a Beck; thou were an humble
Worm and he will tread on thee, spurn thee to nothing, triumph in his Tyrany, and
thou remain a Mome, a suffering Idiot


You wrong my Husband there, he scorns to beat me.


But he does worse, he pinches back or belly; or else thy Purss I Am sure'on't;
^he'l not spare thee a penny to buy Pepins or scarce Pinns


He Is somewhat wary I confess, but not so bad, as you would make him.


There Is our sister Touchstone the Goldsmith's Wife, she leads a life as merry
as the day is long


The happier she; and yet you do not hear me complain, I am contented.


So are patient fools; but women that have wit, are not so tame: if thou will
see a Play it shall cost thee nothing, I Will warrant thee a Ticket, she has a
friend, a Player, a pretty fellow that at any time will pleasure her, and her
friends too


I do not love to buy my pastime at so dear a rate.


How like an Ass thou talk, it is wondrous pretty to have a Player hand us
into the House; and when the Play is done out to the Tavern, where we are
merry, Laugh until we tickle


Without your Husbands!


Or we were worse then mad; yet now and then Touchstone, himself comes to us,
an easy natured man, full of belief, dare trust the Player and his wife
together, even in the Bed he is so fond of both


Oh fie upon it, there will no good come on it.


And if her friend take her to Finsbury, (as now and then we must go see our
Cosen supposed living somewhere,) she leaves word, and he perhaps soberly
follows after, and if she is gone from thence, or never was there, she is
prepared with an excuse for either, against she comes home; your Players are
huge witty and fit a Woman for that purpose rarely; which the good man does
hugg with eager credit, and gives his friend thanks for the care he had of his
dear wife. This is the fruit of Tickets; now if you will see a Play, be one of us,
we will find you Tickets and your Husband too


I am not grown so desperate I thank you, nor you I hope, although you talk so
wildly


Is mirth termed wildness then? prithee turn Recluse, shut thy self up in shop,
and stinck a Month, then come abroad to air thy self, and see who will endure
thy Company; what, deny to see a Play? refuse a noble Ticket? tha'rt Earth
already, doubtless


'T makes no matter, you will ticket it so long that at the last I fear you will come
behind hand in your Reckoning; I Will trouble you no more sweet Mistress Frail


It Is not desired, good Robin Wisdoms Daughter. The Baggage though has touched
me to the quick; pox take the Reckoning, would it might miscarry, but if it be,
here is one I Am sure concerned in it


What talking to thy self?


A thing came in my head that did direct my eyes down to my Belly, but let that
pass -- methinks you are mighty smug as though you came but lately from your dear
beloved Sweet-Lips


Now thou vexest me; I must confess she courts me with as eager an appetite as
ever, but I slight her, the thought of thee draws all my faculties unto their
proper center thy dear Bosom; but why so trim art thou for walking, love


I am invited by a friend of mine, a sprightly jovial Girl, one I call sister,
to see a Play


I prithee what is her Name?


One that is not in your List I promise you; fie Hunt-Cliffe fie, will you
never leave enquiring after new Faces, where is the love to me you seem so much
to glorify your self in


Do thou distrust my love, dear heart, my soul and all that do belong to it
are thy Vassals: the Light's not constanter unto the day, then I to thee, and
do thou doubt me dearest


Nay, nay, with her I dare adventure thee, she is my friend, I know she will
not wrong me, besides she has a friend some say dare fight, and he a strict eye
carries over her


So let him; thou art my Hysperides. But hear thee is my Band and half shirts
done


They Will be brought home within a day or two. Will you go with us to the Play?


If you command me, but you know my stock is low, my Moneys will not come to
Town this month yet, and I hate when I Am frolique to be scanted


I have a Piece; doubtless she will bring another to serve her friend; and that
will do it I warrant thee


Well I Am thy servant still.


What wind drove thee this way?


The breath of my Mistresses commands, I am sent to a Customer with these two
Barells of Anchoves


When will thou remember me:


Oh -- for thy friends Rasey and Froth.


I you Rogue did you not promise it.


And will perform't I vow with the first opportunity -- where is thy Mistress? I
need not ask for thy Master, I know where he is, he and mine are at the old
sport, the merry game


And my Mistress is at hers by this time or I Am mistaken, she will not be one of
the last couple in Hell I warrant her


A shrewd woman able to break a man's back if he had no other ways to do it,
but I Have a Mistress so far from those ways, she is as modest, as loving, and
as careful a wife as any in the City; when he has been out all night and
perhaps lost twenty or thirty pound at Dice, she takes no notice on it, but bids
him welcome home in the morning with all the sweet words she can devise, gives
him a Cawdle, has him to bed, and there he sleeps till three or four a Clock
in the afternoon, and then he is ready for the sport again


A brave woman, mirour of Patience.


Nay, I Have over heard him swear unto himself, he feared he should be damned for
wronging so good a wife, and by this hand the very thought of her sets me into
a trembling; when I Am about to steal Oil, Oysters, Anchoves, or any other
Comodity to pleasure a friend, but when I consider that it cannot last, and he
must break if he holds on his course, I then take hardy grace and make me
friends of the unrighteous Mammon


Let me not live if it ben't the wisest course, I promise you I practice it, I
find my Master draw one part of the house his way, and my Mistress draws
another part her way; and if I (lying in the Shop) don't draw another part my
way, let the Rafters of the house fall upon my head


I like that well, there is but one way to that Wood, a false Key, my friend.


I hope thou do not think me unprovided of such an Engine.


We shall be brothers by and by, how could I else (my Mistress being so over --
vigilant,) accomodate my friends and my self too, and send Time merrily about
his business


Froth has the same trick too, and so has Rasey (but not a word but mum I
charge thee Samphire,) we can keep at our Randevouze from one till five in the
morning, and enter the Tenements with such security as though we had been
Tenants there all night


When shall we meet?


I Will give thee notice.


shall we not drink together?


A Cup or two at the next door, I Will get a friend to take care of my Shop the
while, and call me if need be -- Remember Rogue your promise to my friends


Pugh, we will talk of that by and by.


I protest I never knew such bad Trading in my life.


Every one complains sir, except the Coffee-Houses, and they are never empty.


They are some hinderance indeed, especially in a morning, but we have
Interlopers nearer us, God bless us from a Gun; each paltry Coachman, Butler,
or Cast-serving-man now set up the Victualling Trade; the time has been, we
have not had a Room empty before this time o'th day, that Company (as one may
say) have sat on one another Lap


And many turned away too, sweet heart, which we would willingly now entertain:


Pox take their Receptacles, how do they fill, below?


^ut thinly truly sir, take one time with another I believe our Custom is as
great as theirs


I think not, Froth; I do not find it so in my Accounts, and yet I understand
not any reason why Gentlemen should forsake my house, I never was wanting in my
due respects and regard toward them, and have endeavored to please all
Companyes, and distaste none


That has been my care too sweet heart.


Some men think themselves bound to come always to one house, and love to see
the fashion of others, you know sir new Brooms sweep clean; and new Comers
promise much to Customers


And perform as little after a while; but I have been civil to many, not only
trusted 'em with my Commodities, but lent 'em money out of my Purss, which is
not yet discharged; methinks Gentlemen (as they are Gentlemen) (I name no man,)
should think of such civilities, I see 'em daily frequent those places, (though
they think they dance in Tenibris) and could take a course that would not
please 'em, but I had rather (and 'twould be part of satisfaction to me) enjoy
'em at my house as formerly, for I owe much civility to a Gentleman, and
'twould go against the hair for me to trouble 'em


Yet Gentlemen should do like Gentlemen.


That Is true sweet heart, but every like is not the same. Do You see how they
flock in yonder? I protest if we have no better Trading, I shall never leave
thee money enough when I am dead, to be married in thy white Satin Gown to
another, as thy Predecessor was; no, no, Hercules then supported but one
victualling house, and now he has three.


Give us that when we are going


What are you pleased to have?


A Brick -- and what --


Half a Breast of Mutton.


You shall -- show a Room there.


Will you please to walk in?


Here are more sweet heart -- welcome Gentlemen -- why where are you there?
show these


What will you please to have Gentlemen?


How -- what say you! a couple of Chickins.


I, I.


What Bread Gentlemen?


No Brick; Manchet, and fresh Beer.


You shall Gentlemen, will you please to walk in?


Mr. Subtler how do you?


The better to see you all well Gentlemen -- where are you there -- does no man
hear me? show these Gentlemen a Room


You Are welcome Gentlemen.


What are you pleased to have?


A Ma^chet or two, and your best Butter.


and a Cup of nappy Ale.


That I Will promise you Gentlemen -- will you walk in?


Here are more Compa^y sweet heart.


I hope thou have complained without a cause, it may prove a good Morning.


Happy be lucky -- where are you there? show these Gentlemen a Room.


What will you please to have?


A Role, and a Cup of your best Ale.


Bring me a single pot of Purle.


You shall, you shall.


HE has pickled you.


And peppered you (my friend) or I Am mistaken.


A pox take all ill luck, who brought him to us?


The Devil upon Dun's back I think, I Am sure I Have lost seven pound.


And I Am not much behind thee, do think he did not put the slirr, upon us
were his Dice right


Right for his purpose doubtless.


I know not, but as I could guess he played the square.


And we the Coxcombs, now could I hang my self to think upon the Carke and care
my Olive takes at home


I shall not fret my neck for that matter, for I have one as careless as thine
is careful, and faith we are well met; if I chance to eat a Spider I hope
thou wilt visit my Carcass in the Grave, ycliped Ludgate; there are as merry
Worms as heart can wish boy


Be no Lillyan Rogue, Predict not; I fear my Stars e're long will direct me
that way, if I become thy fellow Collegiate once. A short life and a merry life
we will cry; in the mean time let us tope a Pint at the Rose and so march home


Tom, wilt drink a Glass of Wine, or Breakfast with us?


Neit her.

I am but just come from the Coffee-House, and must not drink, nor eat till
Dinner time


An imposition ridiculous! and he is but shallow brained inclines to keep it.


That Is your opinion, but I find it otherwise:
If I abstain not some few hours, it will not Operate effectually.

Dares the Turks Bill avouch that Language! he has stolen it from Salvator
Winter the grand Operator; tell him I Will justify't


Did not mind his words? a said he must abstain, or 'twould not do: his
Body's then beholding more to Abstinence then to the Liquor; and I will
maintain't a Cup of Ale-berry, or Warme-Broth exhibited to his small Guts,
observing lesser time then now he foolishly prescribes himself, shall actuate
in all parts of his Body, and do his business better


Abandon it. A currish cynicall Drink; I am persuaded the first Inventer was
Diogenes Canes, an utter Enemy to sweet Society


It is supposed (and credited by most) the Berry grew upon a Bramble, near the
River Stix, and the Devil to congratulate his Coze the Turk, after a mighty
slaughter, made on the Christians, sent a graft of it to Turkey, where it since
has spread it self, and like to Locus overrun the Country; That it being
grown both troublesome, and loathsome, the Turk (to ridd his Country often)
Transports it, and sends it by the basest of his People, with a large sale of
most Non-sensicall virtue, to vend it amongst the Christians, and so poison 'em


Much probabillity in it, believe me, Tom; for look but on the color of the
Liquor, and if it don't resemble Stix in self, never trust Complexions, nor
believe old Poets; and then the Scent on it does conclude it came from old
Gehenna, Lucifers deep Furnace, a stench to stifle virtue and good manners


A learned Lecture!


Nay, it is most pernicious unto the brain, it fires the Pericranium, disorders
all the faculties, presents Ideas most delusive; Treason, Murder, (the hand
helps to ambition) twins of villainy: Brutus ('it is thought) drank heartily of
it when he designed the death of Royal Caesar; and Cataline Caroust it with
more greediness, then the blood of slaves; The Friar that murdered Harry the
Fourth of France drank of it; Vaux and Noll (the last grand Conspirator) tossed
it up and made no bones on it: (Treason went down merrily.) It is a drink fit
for dark Lanthorn men, but such as love their reason, and the light, will walk
our way (boy) drink good Sack, and laugh


Prithee let me go, do not bayt me thus.


As I Am a friend to goodness, it is my fear (if thou continu'st longer in thy
error) thou'st be detected in some Pamphlet, for an Idiot, but a man of far
design. I would not have Treason lurk under this thin hide of thine, for there
the danger lies, or Caesar speaks untruth, (with Reverence.


All this will not do.


But mark the folly, Tom, of you Coffee-House hunters you pretend it does
preserve your health, keeps you alive better then the Juice of Li^num vite, or
Aqua-Mirabilis; when (for pr^batum) the^e was hanged last Sessions a precious
Pick-pocket that drank it frequently, and with the like observance, as thou
d^st; and yet you see, mortus est, nay, I am confident, that had thou
brought a Gallon on it to the Gallows, and made him drink it, 'twould not have
saved his life: where rests the virtue of your Horse-pond-Liquor then


Well, well, this noice converts me not nor will I drink with ye.


Go hang thy self Jew; better Company will.

There will be ten Pound offered ere't be long, to bring some Traitor in, and I
hope to find thee


Pugh, if that be all do your worst.


Farewell burnt bread and pudle water.


Vat be you doing dear, hoar, shade?


I am making the Chocolet, sir.


make a de devell! be de Chocolet to make now? bougra! de damm hoar, bish,
shade, vill break a me, begar; she put in to a mush Milk: you shade, hoar, une
quart a de Milk, and deux quarts o de vater, vid one two Eggs, and a little
Sugar make a de boon Chocolet may foy. Vife, pray you look to her, begar she
be de hoar a de house, -- velcome, velcome, you been velcome


Monsieur Mahoone? Bon jour.


Diable de Monsieur; me be no French man, me be de Country of de Turk.


You imitate their broken dialect.


Me travel all the Varld, me speak all de Lingua; damm a de Frensh, me love a
de Anglish, dix temps better, by our great Prophet Mahomet. Vat vill you drinc


Coffee, bring me a Cup of Coffee.


And us the like.


You shack dog mind, a your business. ver vill you be? vid dese Gentlemen?


Coffee, Coffee.


Roga, mind your business; de Coffee, de boyne Coffee; de Coffee Cordial for
dese Gentlemen. Mind a your business shack nape, me tell you dat. Begar,
Gentlemen me tell you une ting, mine Coffee, be de Coffee of all de Varld, make
a de man -- ha, ha, ha -- merry, may foy; it cure a de Ish in de Code, it make
a de man strong, very good strong, dat be vorne a vay vid venery, and de
droping a de shine in une two tree score years and no more begar, better den de
devell Doctor, be sure of dat.


Coffee, Coffee.


Coffee! you be vise men begar; Coffee! de better drinc in de Varld; it make a
de man strong, very good strong; me tell'd you dat before, Turk so strong,
dat une Turk kill une douzane'Cristians for a breakfast; dat make them so
mighty begar


Thou Wilt never leave thy braging, thou art a right French man.


Begar me be no Frensh man, me no lie, me tell you de true -- mind your
business dear shack nape. You be velcome: vat vill you ave


Chocolet.


Chocolet! you be very vise men for dat; de better drinc in de Varld, it make a
de man strong, very good strong, for de voman, une Turk get une douze de
enfans e're matin begar, dat make them so numerous -- you damm shade mind a you
business, and bring de Chocolet for dis Company -- you damm shade, mind a me


Yes, sir.


So very good, mine Owse fill by and by; vat vill you ave?


Some Chocolet, and some Coffee.


Four boue, may foy! de Chocolet and de Coffee make a de man live for ever! you
shack dog, nape, mind a de Coffee, and you damm shade, hoar, bish, mind de
Chocolet -- me till you une ting, vud de Anglish drinc no oder drinc den de
Chocolet and de Coffee, dey vud kill all de Turks in Cristendom; and conquer
all de Varld begar


Thou art the lying'st fellow --


Me tell de true, begar, -- O so mush for dat -- vill you sit a little farther,
give room to


With your leave Gentlemen.


Vat vill you ave?


Some Coffee, and some Chocolet.


Very vell; begar you know de ting dat be good for de body, me knew dat before.

Ver be you damm shade, bring de Chocolet presant.

You shack dog, pack Rog, vat do you do? mind a your business, and be Ang'd.


What speaks the Diurnal?


It says the Turk will be here within this Month.


We were told that a Month ago, and he is not come yet: but what other News
do you hear


The Roguish Boys at Westminster ('it is said) cry Doxyes twelve a penny.


They are cheaper then shotten Herrings then.


Or Rotten Apples.


Pox on it, few on 'em e're were sound at Core.


What Tom, art thou there? hang me if I saw thee.


Nor I thee, Harry how do do?


Much at one, how does Trading walk.


Curssed lamely, she has the Gout in her great Toe.


IN faith I think (Gentlemen) it is the running Gout that vexes her; and it is
thought she will (if the disease continues) kick her heels up


No great matter, Trade was always a Strumpet fit for any man.


But Lilly they say has put out a strange Prediction that Cucombers, Reddish
and Lettice, shall be very plentiful this year


We shall have Sause then, get Meat where we can.


You know the Proverb more Sause then Pig.


Bring some more Coffee.


And Chocolet.


Me do your business presant.


Why Gentlemen, look you, the thing is this, if he come on that side, why then
you know he comes not on the other side, but put case he should devide his Army
and march both ways, then you know who can keep him back


What does the fellow mean?


I know what I know, and there is an end, if he Land at Dover once he will be in
England presently


Ha, ha, ha.


Why Gentlemen it is no laughing matter, I know what I know, few words are best;
for certain the greatest part of his Army was seen on Calice Sands four Nights
ago, though the Diurnal mention it not, yet it is as prodigious for ought you
know as the late great Whale


Gentlemen, has any of you seen the Play of Harry the eight?


Many years ago I did.


And so did I.


It Is rarely set forth, they say.


Gentlemen as I Am a Christian I ought to speak, I know and you cannot but all
know, that if the Turk come into England once 'twill be the worse for the whole
state of Christendom


Let him come, we have* Jews enough to entertain him. Bur sir, they say it is
done rarely well


I cannot believe it, it is impossible they should do any thing so well as I
have seen things done


When Tailor Lowen, and Pollard were alive.


Did you not know Benfield, and Swautted?


Did I not know 'em? yes, and hum'd them off a hundred times.


But did you know Mat Smith, Elis Worth, and Fowler at the Fortune?


Yes, and I will tell you by a good token; Fowler you know was appointed for
the Conquering parts, and it being given out he was to play the Part of a great
Captain and mighty Warrior, drew much Company; the Play began, and ended with
his Valor; but at the end of the Fourth Act he laid so heavily about him, that
some Mutes who stood for Soldiers, fell down as they were dead e're he had
touched their trembling Targets; so he brandisht his Sword and made his Exit;
never minding to bring off his dead men; which they perceiving, crauld into the
Tyreing house, at which, Fowler grew angry, and told 'em, Dogs you should have
lain there till you had been fetched off; and so they crauld out again, which
gave the People such an occasion of Laughter, they cried that again that again,
that again


I but what do you call him was the man; he played the devil in Doctor Faustus,
and a fellow in the Gallery throwing a Tobacco-Pipe at him; I hope to see thee
(quoth He) e're long as bad as I am, what is that quoth the fellow? the Son of a
Whore quoth He


Ha, ha, ha.


You talk of your Players, I am for the Fencers, there are none living now like
old Bradshaw, old Batty, Chatterton, and Ned Gibs


I, and the Miller, I remember them too.


What Swan the Wrestler? know him? I think I did.


And so did I, then there was Will the Labourer and Will the Pewterer, that
were hanged -- O they were nimble men


And Jack the Butcher, a stout Rogue, and the Gentleman Wrestler; they were
brave men indeed, there is none left live like 'em. The sport that I have seen
in Lincolnes-Inn-fields, and Moore-fields -- did you not know little Dick that
kept the Ring


What the old fellow? he and I has cracked many a Cup together; I was a Gamster
too in those days, I loved to raise a Cudgel, and try a fall, as I did my
Dinner


And so did I, I did so pay a Butcher at Bradshawes School once, -- I came up
to him thus -- He rises, and extending his Arm hits the Person sets next him
in the mout


What do you mean by this, sir?


I was but showing how I came on.


I promise you were in another place you should not come off so, sir.


He meant no harm, only to show his skill.


Let him do it some where else.


The place is as free for us, as it is for you, sir, for our money.


Nay if the Gentleman be angry, let him turn the Buckles of his Girdle behind
him


Come, you do not well, first to give an Offense, and then to justify your
self in it


Vat be dat? vat be dear? hoe make a de noise, make a de devell, no stay in my
Owse begar, take you de varning a dat


Well, well, we have done. Bring us some more Coffee.


And Chocolet.


Vid all mine art, four bone.


Sit you merry -- take money here.


My dearest Rampant how do?


Prithee love get thee into the next Room, I Will come to thee presently.


Do not stay.


I cannot from thee my dearest.


Who takes money?


They mind it not, let us begone.


Vere be you dear? you damm shade at de Bar, you hoar my Wife, take a de
Reconing you hoar


Have I been gone so long with a Pox to you?


Nay Gentlemen we are going too.


There is a China Cup broke, and to pay for.


Very right, what is the price?


Eighteen pence.


How? fie upon it.


No less begar, den vne silling and vne six pence.


It Is unreasonable, but how ere we will pay't.


This comes of fooling.


You be de velcome Gentilemen.


Would they were all gone, I sit on Thorns till I am with my Hunt-Cliffe.


It Is talked there has been a great Overthrow given lately to the Turk, 3000
Slain, besides the Prisoners taken, which doubtless must come near that number,
and most wealthy Prizes


I Am glad on it, but alas, sir, it is to them. but a mere Flea bite in
comparison, to such a loss on our side; they can spare thirty or forty Thousand
and never shrink for it


With favor, I should think it were good Policy, and I presume much Honor to
our Nation, if twenty Thousand men well Disciplined, were sent to his Dominions
and there plagued him, 'twould gore him to the Guts, and make him draw his Army
homewards with a pouring vengeance


O sir, 'twould cost a world of Money, that, and we are poor; I must confess
'twould be a brave exploit, and fill the mouth of Fame. But it cannot be


Pray why, sir?


Why for many Reasons Sir, as the case stands now we have a Gang of Fellows
would change Sides with them, and among friends we should generally make better
Turks then Christians


He cannot be a perfect English man, that to promote his Countries Honor would
not sell half his Patrimony


It were a shame the Frenchmen should take such an Honor from Us.


For my part (Gentlemen) I do protest I would contribute willingly my part to
further the Design; would it were Working


You speak nobly.


What do you hear of Ludlow?


Nothing but mum.


Here Is none but friends, good sir what is it?


He is turned Turk -- pray pardon me,

I speak but as I Have heard.


Why is that such a crime? but without fooling, is he changed?


I wish he were if he be not.
Why do not thou think he were changed for the better;
Come you know the Old Saying,
A bad God makes a good Devil; and that sort of Christian makes an excellent
Turk


Sir, as to your business fear it not.


I hope so, sir.


We have 'em upon the hip, fear it not man, I Will warrant thee.


The Suit has cost me a deal of Money.


And more 'twill cost thee, but they shall pay all at last with a
Circumferentibus


Nay then I care not, though I sell two of my Oxen more.


Vere be de damm shade, de hoar my Vise? begar she be gone again -- hoar, hoar,
vere be you hoar


My head does so ache Sweetheart.


Begar my head ash, you lie -- look


Here take your money.


And ours too.


What have you had Gentlemen -- Oh I cry you mercy you are welcome Gentlemen.


Vat vas dat shack Rog dog vas vid you hoar, in de room?


A Cosen of mine you never saw before.


Your Cosen! all de devells in hell be your Cosen me tink. Give me a de money.


Take it, and be choakt with it.


Very good Vife, very good Vife.


Look you, look Rogues, but my dear Brothers, I have brought my friend Samphire
according to promise


He Is welcome, get you into that Room, I Will shut the door upon you, be not
seen, I Will provide for you


Make have, I shall be mist at home.


I am very glad of your Acquaintance.


I am the like of yours.


When comes the things you wot on?


To night without fail, when my Master and Mistress are a Bed.


Here Is that holds at least three Quarts; when this is out it shall be filled
again, and there is a Jack to drink out of


A good Rogue.


Hear me, have an eye to the Door, if any offer to turn the Latch, clap your
Flaggon under the Table an call manfully for three Jacks of Ale, I Will pay't

I come, I come, I come.


Oh brave Rogue -- remember Rogue a Morsel?


Well, I Will do what I can. I come, I come,


He seems to be as true a Trout as e're struck water.


A real Rogue.


I come, I come, I come: here Rogues fall to, I have nib'd a cold Chicken, and
half a Breast of Mutton for you, and here is a slice or two of Household Bread,
good Provinder you Raskalls, I come, I come

Is your Flaggon empty?


We have dreyn'd him.


Give't me, I Will fill't again, and then happy man be his dole -- I come, I come,.


Now Rogue, you see what Company I keep.


I am proud of 'em, and will not die in their Debts.


I dare not stay, I Will only take a snap, and so be gone.


And so must I.


I come, I come, I come -- Has any been with you yet?


No, not any.


The better; come, two Jacks a piece will send it packing.


Have at thee Boy.


So; now get you about your businesses,


Why Froth, why Froth -- please you to walk in.


I come, I come, you are welcome Gentlemen.


What will you please to have; a couple of cold Chickens, or half a Breast of
Mutton


The half Breast of Mutton, what say you?


I, 'twill do very well.


You shall have it presently.


Froth, show 'em a Room.


Will you please to walk in, Gentlemen.


Where are you there, my folks are mad sure; prithee Sweetheart reach me the
half Breast of Mutton hither


Here Is no such thing, unless you will divide a Breast in two.


Lord, how thou talk! there is half a Breast ready cut.


My eyes are my own sure.


Prithee let me see, I should have eyes too -- odds so there is a Chicken gone
too; we are like to thrive at this rate! four and sixpence in a morning


But then consider --


Mistress, Mistress, the half Breast of Mutton, Mistress the Gentlemen are in
have


Here has been more have then go^d speed it seems.


What is become of the Mutton, and one of the Chickens?


What Mutton forsooth?


The half Breast, and the fellow to this Chicken.


Alas how should I know forsooth, I have not eyes here, and in the Cellar too;
the Bell-man's Dog was here but even now, a shirking Cur, and yet I cannot say
he had it


Who ever had, the Devil choke him with it.


I sir, but it is past that by this time.


And so, my Lady.


It is even so my Lord; and what think you on it?


Why scurvily! and very scurvily! But tell me, Frail, (let thy Soul dictate to
thee) do I deserve this scorn, these slights, these base untoward Answers! have
I not been a Husband -- indeed too, too, too Kind --


Too much of one thing is good for nothing, you know it, it has been your own
Doctrine


I, but my dear Frail I now am sincking.


What remedy, would you have me sinck with you sir?


No my Dear; give me but an account of some goods that I miss, they will be a help
to us in our necessity


In Faith sir no, what goods I have I Will keep; and they will keep me, if not
something else will


This is audatiousness beyond example; the common Brothels would not entertain
a Wife so hideous, so monstrous evil; Ingratitude is worse then Whordom,
Frail, consider that and weep


Ha, ha, ha, weep, for what? for seeking to preserve my self against the storm
is coming? let Ludgate be thy Grave and perish there, I Will be Frail still, and
take my pleasure


Woman provoke me not -- tell me where my Goods are?


Thrown into the Thames.


Vile woman, would I could throw thee after 'em.


Oh master, master, there are two of


Prithee Wife go to 'em.


I go to 'em! what to do?


See who they are, give 'em good words, and tell 'em I will be with 'em
suddenly


To much purpose indeed.


In the mean time, besure you do convey the choicest of my Goods are now
remaining, with my Debt Books, and all my Box of writings to my friends house,
where I intend to be for some time 'till I can Compound my Debts


They are gone; you may take your walk when you please sir.


Come, I hope thou wilt be in a better humor er't be long.


I Am not of your opinion in good truth sir.


What does thy Husband think I can Coin money? were not for thy sake he
should lick his spiggot and know his Nails for want of Company, e're I would
cross his Threshold


O but dear Hunt-Cliffe for my sake.


Death! what would have me do? I have it not, thus to be vexed for paltry
thirty pound! I Will be a stranger here, or never let me --


Oh not so my dear; thou wilt break my heart then, I prithee hear me.


What would thou say?


My Husband is a very loving Husband.


What Is that to me.


And now and then when he does get old Gold, he gives it me to hoord; that at
this time I praise my Stars I have I think far more then will discharge your
Debt


What of all this?


And here they are, which I (to save your Credit) have robbed my Cabinet of; not
thinking any thing too dear for thee, with whom I have entrusted my very self


Well, what then?


If you will take the care to Pawn 'em Hunt-Cliffe, but not to loose 'em, for
they are as precious as is my Husbands love, and my well being; and how near
that is guess your self


Oh my poor Rogue.


None will deny thee Silver on 'em, but be sure they be laid safe, or I Am
undone for ever


Do thou fear me? have I a Soul?


Then take 'em as the pledges of my love, but so as they may be returned again,
I trust thee with my life in parting with 'em


Pox on the dirt, I prize thy sweet conditions beyond a world of such like
trash as this


Dear Hunt-Cliffe if thou do regard my quiet, be careful to redeem them in
some time, and I Will contribute toward it what I can


My dear thy Obligations are Charms to me.


Samphire about your business, let my Writing and Debt Books -- Lord I am over
come with passion


I prithee be not so, I Will run a share with thee in all thy sufferings.


That Is my torture; Oh must thy goodness, thy indulgence meet the cruelty that
does pursue my vanity, my profuse living, my extravagancies, my Creditors wound
me not half so much as the sharp thoughts of thee


Yet hear me dearest, do not despair nor throw a mercy from thee, I doubt not
but my care has so provided, thou may be able to appease thy Creditors, and
stop their violence


Alas poor thing what can thou do?


Why you shall see provided, my dear Husband: (and yet I must beg pardon for
that Covenant, it being too peremptory for me to proffer --


Prithee my Dearest.


I say if you will please to look about you for the future, I dare warrant your
Recovery, then never flinch for it


Say thou so my better Genius. Samphire stir nothing till my wife and I do
consult further


Now my hopes are spoild, no matter; I shall become the honester, farewell
Smoke, thou art but a vapor, and Froth, thou art but wind, and for Rasey, he
is too dear a Companion


Was ever man stockt with such impudence, he sends with that authority to
provide a Supper, and of no small consequence; as though he owed me nothing, or
I bound to feed his Riot for a copy of his ugly Countenance


Why truly Husband, and speak but the bare truth, the man is handsome, handsome
enough indeed la


I have seen (for all your wise opinion) a far handsomer forsake the world at
Tyburn


Oh this money.


Were not to bring a scandal on my house, he should not have digested scarce
his Supper, e're I had Sergeants to salute his person; and yet, for ought I
know it shall be done


Oh good, my heart, how do you know but he has brought you money; disgrace him
not before his friends, he is a Gentleman, think on that; I am persuaded he
would never have ventured (being well acquainted with your frequent Threats) to
invite his friends but on a handsome score: take my word for this night, and in
the morning do what you please


By this hand I will.


Nebor, mine good Nebor vere be you dear? vere been mine Vife, begar she be de
hoar o de Varld, she robe a me o all mine money my l'argent begar, for de foke,
vy Nebor, vere be mine Vife? me break house to day, me be undone, de grand pock
take you all, vere be de hoar de dam bish hoar mine Vife? me be mad as de dog,
bish, all mine money begone; me be mad begar


Did ever man make such a monster of himself! why don't you come to bed?


Oh shade! vere have you been! foke, foke, foke, a pock take you for me. Vere
be mine money you hoar shade? vere be de money you took to day, shade


Are you not ashamed to disturb your Neighbors?
Come to bed, and you shall know all.

Know all! vat be dat? me come to bed! very good, de devel come to bed, me no
come to your dog-bish hole you shade


Why then go hang your self.


Out a hoar shade vere be mine money you damm shade vere be mine money? me
murder you, and send your Sole to de devell begar: mine money, mine money, mine
money


More Wine, who waits there? why Rasey you Ra^kall more Wine.


I have it here Sir.


Bid your Master come to me.


My Mistress Sir!


No, your Master, sirrah.


I unde^stand you Sir, but I believe you have ridden him so much he will not endure
the Bit


Why do not stir?


I Am gone Sir.


Hunt-Cliffe, thou art a Prince.


Disgu^s'd or near upon it.


Wh^le these Spanckers last, Boys --


Where lives thy Mammon, thy kind hearted devil?


I have a legend, pretty smooth faced devils, such as would draw you from your
prayers, to sin; fine soaking dev^ls

Oh Sir, are you come?

I suppose you sent for me.


In very good time Sir; how stands Accounts between us?


What mean you Sir?


I pray let us know it Sir, even from the beginning of the world unto this
present t^me Sir: I abhor a Sergeant, and your poor stratagems; what do I owe
you Sir? I Have money for you, I hope you will not refuse it


Forbid I should; Sir I'^e fetch you up a Bill.


Pray do S^r, and put our Reckoning into it.


By no means, we will pay our shares.


As you please for that Gentlemen.


Do as I bad you Sir.


It shall be done Sir.


I hate to have such d^rty fellows think I am beholding to 'em, my soul's
above it; men that have narrow though^s crouch to such wretches, but mine are
boundl^ss --


Here it is Sir, and the precise day set down for every Reckoning, I sco^n to
wrong you Sir


A righteous Stewa^d -- so -- right -- well -- very well -- just -- it is
granted; and know I scorn to wrong you punctual Compound, the Total is 20.
Pound, make your Acqu^tance, and that a general one, and your money's ^eady


I sir, that is soon done, my Wife's a W^tch sure,

She told me she bel^ev'd this night he would pay me, the Acquitance Sir is ready.


Let me see it -- from the beginning -- very well -- now Gentlemen I hope you
w^ll subscribe as Witnesses


I, I.


Now tell your money, sir, Nineteen old Pieces, with their Allowance, friend
may pass for twenty pound, your Debt


Bless my eye sight, my own Gold upon my life, the Gold I gave my Wife in
keeping -- Oh vile Woman, Oh wretched man -- give me back my Acquittance, the
Golds not right, it is base Counterfeit Gold, Oh my vexation


Art mad, the Gold's good Gold.


Current I warrant thee.


If it be, he came not lawfully by it, it is not well gotten, and I shall never
thrive with it


Have a care what you say, friend.


What does the fellow murter?


None of your f^llow yet Sir, I am no Cheat, give me my Acquittance, t^ke your
ill got Goods, and I Will take my course for my Debt -- what paid with a Pig from
my own Sow! -- Rasey bid your Mistress come hither presently -- I shall run mad
indeed


I know where his Shoo wrings him; his Wife gave me this Gold to p^wn for
Silver -- pox on the oversight, I shall loose her love for ever


Oh 'twas a gross mistake.


Not like a Gentleman.


Pay him in his own Coin?


Come, come, the Key of your Cabinet?


Lord, why thus hasty Husband; I cannot find it presently.


How crept these things into that Gentleman's, that worthless Gentleman's
Pocket? you know 'em do you not


Oh my misery -- a Gentleman! a Villain, a perjured Villain --


Answer me to my question?


Poor Creature he has struck her dumb -- fie Hunt-Cl^ffe, fie.


Pox of this business, it is a nasty business.


Come, let us leave him freting in his own grease, l'le not endure the storm.


Charge a Constable with the Rogue, he has robbed me -- oh Woman what have thou
done? what have thou made me do? open thy shame, and mine to all the world, I
shall not stir forth of my doors, but be pointed at by each Prentice boy,
become the talk a^ every Coffee-House


Dear Husband upon my Knees I beg your Pardon never will I commit an error like


It was thy Just moved thee to do it now, and that is such a Cankar it will eat
w^ole Families up


He never did attempt (if you will believe me Husband) any uncivil Act toward me
since first he came to the House, I looked upon him for a Gentleman; and knew
you would arrest him, (you had sworn it) if that he paid you not this night


What then? must you rob me therefore to pleasure him?


I lent 'em him to pawn for S^lver, on condition he would redeem 'em in a month,
to which he swore most vehemently


Rise, I forg^ve thee, be wiser Wench, hereafter, and though he thinks he does
securely swim, if there be Law in the Land I Will hamper him



