A Sirs these eyr has a mickle geod savor. Iha creept thus firr intolth'
Kingdom, like an Erivigg intoll a mons lug, and sall as herdly be gat oout. Ise
sa seff here as a Sperrow under a Penthoowse. Let the Sheriffo Cumberlond gee
hang himsell ins own gartropts, Ise ferr enough off him, ans fellow Officer the
hangman noow. I a Scot Theff may pass for a trow Mon here; Aw the empty Weomb
and thin hide I full often bore in Scotland, an the geod fare I get here! Be me
saw Ise two yards gron about sin I came fro Scotlond, the Deele split me gif I
came at thee mere Scotlond. Ise eene noow ny the bonny Court, wur meny a Scot
lad is gron fro a Maggot ta a bran Goose; marry Ise in geod pleight. We Will,
Scotlond, we will, tow gaff st me a mouth, but Anglond mon find me met; it is a
geod soil geod feith, an gif aw my Contremon wod plant here, th'od thrive
better thon in their non. Scotlond it sell, bar an naked; A carries noought bet
tha walth o Can aboot him, filth an Virmin


Aw Scotlond, Scotlond, wa worth tha tim I came oout o thee; Ise like tha
wandering Jew ha worn my hoofes sa thin as pauper, and can get ne shod for um;
Anglond has geod sooft grond, bet tha people ha mickle hard hearts; Aw Billy,
Billy, thou had better ha taken tha stripe for stelling in Scotlond (bet thot
it is sin ta rob the spettle) an ha thrived by it, than ta come ta be hanged here,
or stervd; it is keen Justace a mon sud dee sick a deeth for macking use o his
hands, I ha ne oder mamber worth ought


On's mon what gar thee in these pickle? how camst hither?


Even on me ten toes sir, and they err worn oout now, thay'l ser me ne longer.


Wha tha Deele sall mend'um? sham faw thee, a Scot an cannot shift.


A lack sir, a mon mo not stell here for's neck, and Ise mickle sham ta beg.


How mon not bag! Ons thou art nen a me Contremon than.


Ey marry that am I, geod feith Ise a Scot, an boorn at Andra keddin.


I thoought fa be thy iddle leife, what gar thee came hither?


A lack mon I sud a bein whopt aboot tha Toown o Barwick for theiffing in
Scotlond, bet brock gale and escaped it


Had tow tha conscienc ta stell fro thy own Contre, an have noot tha sece ta
bag in an oder? fie mon, fie. Ons hoow think leive? Leoke her mon, leok her, sa
tha virtue o bagging


Ey sir, sike a seight may mack a mon sown.


Sow up your chops in tha Deeles nam, gif you cannot bag ye sall not eat sir.


Geod feith an I ha noot eat un morsel these two days, came awey mod, came awey.


Nee, nee, sir stey your fercnes, keep your fangs off sir, ye ma ha tha mang.


Ne geod feith, Ise a clear skind lad.


Bet monstrous lozy.


Dooubt not that sir, thay'l pin ta death sir, for I ha noought ta fed 'um bet
Sken, an that is two toough for their teth -- came awey mon, sum cherete good
Contremon


We Will set doowne -- leoke thee here mon,


Sey ye sa mon.


Reight we will they bein mad up o Cappon and whit broth* they mack their carcass
fat, bet their folls len; do you thenk S. Andra wad a fe^ted la mickle gif a cud
a gat sike met as these* Ne, ne, by me saw Ise hang than; he was stervd, they
fare deliciously; he wos ^oowzy, and hod no sheft, they bien buried aleife in
fin lenin an lown sleeffes* ^he stunk abo grond, they bien swetten'd leiving an
deed, abo an under gron; A me saw S. Andra had her don sa meny marvailes gif a
h^d stuffed his carcass la full as they


Geod feith I main pass for a sent ten, for me carcass is bar an thin enough.


Ey for sent Theff, for he ner did mirackle -- these Torky leg came fro a
Merchants Table, these Widgins wing fro a Citzens, an these Gooses leg fro a
Lawyers


Bred, they mack mere preambl 'boot their boody then aw tha people in Cristendum
de aboot their saws, how had tow tha fece ta speak at sa meny doors mon


A sir, I sall tach ye ta bag bravely, mind ye me noow sir, I stoll two Coows
fro me Contremon and gat tham agat ta Comberlond ta seele, bet tha plaggy
shriefe gar tham tack fro me, an sent me toll tha gale, bet I gat loose, an sa
came froward, an in tha Noorth I met a iddle Turnies lod, wha mad me these
Certifice, an sat aw those Jestece nams tol't, that tha shreife o Comberlond
had den me mickle wrong, an sa Ise came up toll the King for Jestece


Geod feith wad I had sike an oder.


Came awey mon, hest thee, fill thy weomb, and get thee on you sid mon, an Ise
kep o these, and sa nen fall scap us -- hark ye me mon, you mon tell 'am you came
o geod parentage, an ha lost aw your siller as ye came for Anglond -- you mon
speak a by mon, an noot lick a Mole under gron pest herring


We Will, we will, I Will be avis'd be you, gif you far we will I fall noot far amiss.


Gang awey mon, gang awey mon, see tow, see tow yon braw mon tofore thy
eyne


-- Bless your honor, Ise speak a word or two ta your honor.


My honor* -- Pox on your fawning hide, what would you have with me and be
hanged


-- Ne, ne, sir I pray your honor wax noot wrothfull, Ise a mon o geod rank in
my own Contre, an ha kept geod beasts


I, for some bodies else, thou do not look as though thou ere were worth one.


Ne, ne, sir, me non proper geods geod feith; I came wi mickle siller in me
purss ta England, we will clad


With some old Curtains that bore S. Andrews story, or childrens blanquets
stoll, and turned to Trowsies


Ne geod feith, I ha even bien robbed o aw.


Rob thee! of what? had he a mind to be lousy? but this is an Engine laid to
draw a piece of silver to you, is it not so


Your Honor speekes mickle we will.


-- There -- there is some of your Country men at Court lives better by this
trade than you


Un word ta your honor.


Hy day, another! I Am way laid, have thou been robbed too?


Ne, ne sir, ne, tha shriffe o Comberlond has dun me mickle wrong sir.


Whipped you about the Pigmarket?


A has tacken awey me Cows sir, an aw me geods, see here sir, I ha aw those
worthy Jestece nams ta testify


There is no beggar like the Scotch-beger for tricks and impudence -- Come what
must discharge me from you sir, and your bellowing


Geod feith sir I wont siller ta gat Jestece.


-- Had thou had Justice done thee, thou had been hanged long before this.


Bred, he is a fortune teller.


There -- that will serve to buy you Oatmeale; sir there is no more of your
Catterwalling Companions here abouts, is there


Ne, ne sir, ant lick your honor.


Ne, ne, pox on your Nees and your Nose too; I Am glad I Am rid on you.


Noow sir, ye had noot tha fece ta bag, hoow lick ye it noow sir, what ga he
toll ye


These smaw piece o siller.


A geod beginning mon, tolld a ye noot sum o our Contre men liev'd at Court by
baggin


I sea noow a Scot may ly by atorete, an beg wi permission -- we will to Curt ta,
an ly sa fest as tha be o'um


Be me saw an that's herd ta dee;


He Is tha feul, gis a noot?


Ey, ey mon; A has feuld himsell intoll mickle fevor gif a feul himsell noot
oout again -- sey a cams aneust us mon, wees speak toll him -- Bless your honor
sir, bless your honor, Ise gled ta sea your honor in heelth


Be me saw thou art a bold fellow.


I Am your own Contremon sir, I ken your honor mickle we will, bless your worship.


Kenst tow me mon?


Mickle we will an't lick your honor, I ken your honor we will enough, your honor
is the Kings feul


A mon, he kepes mere feules than I; bred, he is keep tow ta gif tow can feul
him; how far Scot art tow


Marry Ise a mickle wey oofe noow.


Bet I wad kne what tow were boorn.


Gin me Moders Weomb sir forty years aghast.


Ons mon speak toll me i what plece o Scotlond were tow boorn.


Geod feith gin meny sir, I ha bien boorn fro plece to plece a me Moders back
sir, and ha seffered mickle sorrow


The fow Deele tack thy large lug, wha was thy fader?


A mon sir surely.


The black Deele a was sur, whar liev'd a*


A sir at a plece your honor kens mickle we will.


Whar mon, whar?


A sir, A sir what pleice caw ye that sir whar your honor nursed tha tyny babe
wi wull on's back sir


Oout tha faw Deele, oout Rog -- bet wha art tow mon?


I Am even yar Contremon two sir, came ta bien a Curtier ta sir.


Ons a Curtier! a Carter, tha Hangmon, that Deele.


Ye ha geod friends thar sir, ye may dee mickle for us.


Dee mon! bred, he that sall dee for thee sall ha enough ta dee; art geod for
oought? wha can dee for thy sell


Even what ye sea sir.


Oout this is base, it shams your Contre, mind ye me; wha o ye swain ha mest
wot


He that can sheft be.


Reight we will.


And that is even I, this feule had noot a fece ta bag toll I boldend hum.


Oout, oout mon, sham feect?


Ne, ne. I sall grew bold enough gif I fall get oought by it.


Gif ye had Clad sirs, what curs wad ye tacke to liew?


Ise cud mack tha King, bliss his Worship, an't lick your honor, mickle geod
Puttins an Potsloose


I Would bien oath Mint, sir, I loove ta finger siller.


We Will sirs came away wy me, for Contres sack Ise gat ye sum Purveyance, an sum
lodging, and tan we fall find oout lum woork for ye among 'um here


Bless your honor for your benefaites.


Pray recollect your self, I cannot do it
Without a loss to my repute and fame,
If you have but a foot of ground unsold.
Therefore consult your thoughts, my willingness
Shall not be wanting to procure your freedom;
But I Would not have a dirty piece of Land
Bring an obstruction to it.

Why? as I live
I have not an Inch left; what ere I morgag'd
Is either sold outright, or forfeited,
I lie not on my Credit.

How Is that Man?
Have you credit then? Why, that is as bad.
It is not held convenient by the Huffe,
Lords of the sword, that any Yongster should
Be one of us 'till he 'as not only lost
his 'state, but's credit too.

Upon my life,
Dear Townshift, I Have not credit for a thrips;
Thou know it well enough, my roaging Landres
Will not do it for the washing of a shirt.

Why, have you shirts then?

One as I live, no more, and that so thin
You may draw't through a Needle.

What Boots have you?

I cannot call these any, yet they are all;
And as for stockings, I have long ago
Held them unnecessary.

Why this Cloak,
And the weather warm and friendly.

It Is too much,
The weight on it, I confess, 's not to be borne,
I Will ease me of the burden, It shall sink
In sack when I Am made free, prithee about it.

I would not for a world you should have any
Remnant of your Estate left,'t would undo you
See, here is my Brothers, Drawforth and Pinck-carkase
May I presume to recommend you to 'em?

You may, you may, dear Townshift.

How now Trapheire,
What is all gone yet?

All he swears by's Twibell,
His Cloak excepted, and its time expires
Within this half hour; shall we make him free?

Trapheire, you now are to begin the World,
Which you cannot do handsomely, unless
Your Land and you be separated, and if
Ought ly concealed, 'twill rise in judgment against you;
Therefore pray have a care, it is Christian Counsel.

It is not fit the least piece of your old
Adulterate fortunes should corrupt the new
Your wit must purchase.

Right, beside, he will never
Have a refined Wit 'till he has nothing left.

The greatest Enemy I have Gentlemen is my Cloak,
And I promise I Will fee 't no more.

Say you so, then to the next Tavern;
Boy -- boy -- a Room.

Please you to walk into a Room Gentlemen?

What call we thee for else?

How like you this Room Gentlemen?

Indifferent; bring us Wine and Tobacco of the best sirrah.

You shall indeed sir.

Dear Townshift thou must show this Gentleman
The way to the Brokers.

Is he for sale, or Morgage?

For sale by all means, I Would not charge my memory
I Have ought left worth redeeming.

Bravely resolved -- Is It Racie?

Right Racie sir believe me.

Trapheire to thee.

Drink apace, dear Townshift
The sight of that same Gentleman's my tortour,
I prithee rid me of him.

Townshift swear him.

I cannot with a safe conscience swear as long
As that appears before me.

How shall I get it out oth' house?

Leave thine here, and wear mine thither.
O how I hate to call it mine -- away wit't.

Trapheire, you now must exercise your Wit
To live on others, as w'ave lived on you;
Wit's never good till purchased, what though it be
With the loss of fortunes Trumperie and Trash;
Content never dwells among dirtie Land, who sells it
Parts with a deal of care, and scurvie toil;
Men never are ingenious that are clogged with it.
The Generous spirit will not be cooped up
In that same Country Cage, a mansion house,
And confines of the Buttery; be free,
Thou art not worth a Groat
When this is spent.

How much, how much dear Townshift?

But thirty by my Valor.

Down with it, down with it;
I Will not put up a Dodkin on it; dear Townshift,
Drink, drink away, I thirst until it is melted,
Your moulten silver swallows best.

His Oath, his Oath.

Your sword.
By this Hilt, and this Blade
Which at Hounslow was made,
You swear to be true
To what shall ensue.
First, You swear not to make it any scruple of Conscience to cheat your
Father; That you will hunt after young Heirs, and when you have courst them
out of wind, you will refresh 'em with some Scrivener, Broker, or Draper; That
you will keep always three strings to your bow, to make it bend till it break;
That having gotten a Bubble or Bishop, a lad of the last adoption, that you
make him sensible of a Wench, though to the charge of a Surgeon, it being
reason all trades should live, and if occasion be, wink at small faults. Next
be sure to keep them continually at Game, or Drinking; Uurge 'em to quarrel,
and then take up the business, but not without profit to the Brotherhood; That
what quarrels soever arise among our selves, must not cause us to fight with
one another, but the Coins of the Bubble or Bishop must make us friends; That
you must not pay your Coachman but with kicks, unless your Bubble or Bishop
do, and then he owes you a fare; That your Bubble, or Bishop, and you, keep but
one Purse, though two Drabs; That when you have dreined him dry, you make him
free, if he sue for it, if not let him keep Company with the Titteretues, and
live upon the sin of Sodom; That you I take your chance of the day, where there
is need of dipping, without grumbling

That while you can stand
With sword in your hand,
You Will not be in aw
Of the Halberteere Law;
Kiss this -- Now you are free
Of the Huffs company.

Hey for the Brotherhood; No Wine stirring, Boy? You Rascal, where is your duty?
absent? hah! More Wine

You shall sir by and by.

Bring a Glass will hold
A Pint at least, I hate a thimble full,
We shall never have consumed this mighty mass
If we sip thus like sparrows;
I marry, this looks like some Brother to you all.

Gramercy.

Sirrah, cover the Board with Bottles,
This is our Coronation day, the Room
Shall swim in Wine; be frolique Huffs, and draine
Me dry, yet I shall live when you are all hanged.

How now, how now Traphiere!

Drink and be damned;
Must I wait on your Driveling?

Drawforth to you -- Charge him home.

Traphiere a whole bottle to thee -- I Am up toth' Chin.

-- So, so sir, -- you are a fine fellow; Is all paid?

No, all is not come in yet.

I Will stay no longer.

Pray leave my cloak behind you.

Your cloak sir? how came it to be yours sir? I have one some where.


Yours is at the Brokers sir.

Is it so sir? I thank you for your information.

There lies the virtue on it.

So sir, I thank you twice; for once I care not if I put my Cloak into my
pocket


But Trapheire, Trapheire.

Who paies the house?

Let the house pay it self; dip, dip and be hanged you that have Cloaks, am I
bound to fill your insatiate Gorge eternally


What Asses were we to let the money ly so long, knowing his Rascally humor,
he will not pay a Penny when he is in drink -- See what thou can work him to


Boy.

Sir -- I shall sir.

Trapheire, a prize Trapheire.

Of what? Sprats?

A Gudgin man, a Gudgin's come to Net;
The Master of the house desires admittance
To play a Game at Ticktack for a Piece;
And thou know Trapheire -- hah --

I know it Rogue;
And thou shall play with him for all he is worth;
I Will venture on thy hand my whole Estate,
This my trusty Blade. Provided always sir --

That you have half -- it is granted -- he is here;
Thou know I have no money.

Thou shall not want dear Bully, I Will not leave
My self a George.

Spoke like thy self, come be so.
There sir, pay your self.

You Are kindly welcome Gentlemen, fetch my Quart.

Death, what is this?

Ha ha, ha -- Only the Reckoning paid sir.

You Are Rogues, Shirks, and Cheates; I Will indict you

Buoy good sir, employ your Tongue at Billings gate;
Adieu, adieu.

Farewell and be hanged.
For your part sirrah, I Will have you up for keeping of a Bawdy house.


Do your worst sir, do your worst.

You Are mickle braw sirs, you are mickle braw; bred, ye leoke mere lick Burgemasters
noow thon hedge creepers; ken ye your sells sirs? ken ye your sells sirs


Geod feith sir, gif aw that sud ken themsells, wad ken themsells, nen wad ken
us; A me saw sir, I Would rader ha'um trast me thon ken me, fur gif they sudken me
reight, thay'd sea me deed tofore thay' trast me


You Are mickle wise sir, ye ha robbed a feul sur.


We wish you we will sir, we wish you we will.


Sey ye sa sir? you are vary cheretable; ken ye me sirs? On's, ye are gron see
loofty you will knee ne body; wha set you up in tha Deeles nam? wha, wha put these
gay feathers on your back? eene I, an noow yol flee awey ta tha Deele, Hark ye
me sirs, gif ye bien sa high, Ise tack ye down wy a Plague ta ye; wha had you are
entailed Virmine taken off ye wy a murren? wha, wha gat ye a --


Oour saders and moders sir.


Did they sa sir? bred, gif they gat ye, they ner cud gat feod enough for yar
side Weombs; Are you provander pricked noow sirs? ha, wha am I? ha sirs, ha, wha
am I


O our geod friend sir, bliss you.


The Deele wound ye, slight ye me? On's, Ise sa geod a mon gas aw in Scotlond,
an ha mere siller in me purse


Anglish stamp sir, I beleev't.


Ye beleeft! wha tha Deele cares for your beleeff?


Geod sir, geod sir be sober.


Bred, Ise not drunken; ha ye bien at cost wy me sirs? hah! Ise sall uncass ye
sirs, an ge your Arse tha Air again, are ye sa hot sirs? want ye a Cooler?
Bred, Ise ge ye sick a Rattle wy a Rom ore tha Riggins sall mack your Ribs
reore sirs


Geod your honor put up your wroth, an wees buckle oour Wots; wees yar on
Contremons ye knee we will enough


An sud leove won oder; you have a geod Mester sir, an oour Contremon, wha macks
mickle o you


Bred, an Ise mack sa mickle o hum as I can.


He Is a geod mon sir, and you ha wot enough.


Ken you that mon, ken you that? On's, an ye bien not wud ye ma ha wot ta chep
enough; bet Ise ne body, my benefaits are noought worth


You Are aw body sir, wees at your Commandment.


Sey ye sa sir? why, noow ye speak, be vis'd by me, any sall oout wot 'um aw;
mind ye me sirs, will ye be avis'd


Sed ye sir, wy aw our hearts.


Ise ha ye turn Dooctors.


Ise a Dooctor, a Dooctor; geod feith, wees mack braw Dooctors.


Mind me mon, mind me; These Kingdom's mickle sick, tha Curt o tha Cety, tha
Cety o tha Curt, an tha Contre o beoth, an aw o'^m o tha Kirk, an tha Law; tha
Kingdom's Livergron wy iddlnes an Raches, and noow noought can cur it bet a
Scots Dooctor, ne matter for your skill


Geod feith sir, wees ha skill enough ta bleed its siller vains Ise warrant ye.


Ha bet confidence, lie and dissemble handsomely.


Wees you are on Contremons sir, doobt it noot.


Tha nam o a Scot gis enough ta cur aw their maladies; ge 'um peson an thay'l
tack it for a Cordall: perswad 'um they ar sick thay'l beleeff ye, and gif ye
mack 'um sick thay'l beleeff their in be health, bet ye mon carry sem show o
hollines wy ye, an profess aw for thayr geods


Sa we sall sir, an tack'um when we ha deon.


Billy sall gaing toll the Contre, and tow salt kep behind, an bien Dooctor
here, and gif tow hest wot enough tow can noot wont werk


Ne geod feith, I sall mack me sell werk enoough, for gif I can hell ne
distampers Ise mack enoough among 'um


Came awey than, came awey.


-- 'Twas Morning ere he went to bed sir.

-- All Is one; tell who it is, and 'twill be warrant
Enough for your awaking him; it is business
I come about, and of concernment too,
That cannot admit delay.

I Will venture then to call him sir.

Do so -- if this design
Of mine prove prosperous, Townshift, it will be
Some comfort to me that I am even with thee.

He Will wait upon you presently,
He Is rising.

A good Lad -- Townshift arm thy self, for I am prepared
To give thee an assault, and dare thy Action
At Law, if Wit and Sword should fail,
Dear Townshift.

By this light I have not slept
A minute; what is the news? you served us bravely the other night at Tavern.

On this drinking!
This perilous Drinking will destroy us all;
Thy pardon my dear heart, the business now
I come about will try thy friendship.

How?
I hope no quarrel.

Yes, with my base stars.

But what is the matter, tell me?

That Is my meaning,
A sort of Rascally Bailiffes dogged me hither,
And thou know if I be once taken I am
A slave perpetually.

What would thou have me to do?
We Will send to Drawforth and the rest.

'T will not do,
They Will make but a disturbance in the street,
Yet I may be surpised for all their Valor,
And then I am undone; the hopes I have
In one I am to dine with lost, which might
Be worth to thee and me some hundreds Bully.

Send for him, now let him take up the business.

What, ere I Am thoroughly known to him; besides,
Should he take this up twenty more would follow't,
Who knowing me so low now, do forbear
To execute their rigor.

What would have me do?

Hark thee, I Have thought upon a fine Deceit;
Have any Patches in thy Chamber?

Rare ones,
Of all sorts.

One to Disguise my face, with a Cloak, would
Do It to the life.

Sure they are gone, I Will send to see.

Oh hang 'em Rogues, the are sculking at the Lanes end,
Or some blind Alenouse -- Dearest Townshift do it.

Do what?

Lend me thy Cloak, and I Will contrive a Patch
Shall cover my left eye, they may not know me.

I know not what to do -- I should go forth
My self.

Nay prithee Townshift --

Will you leave
Your Sword then* you will have no --

Prithee would have me
Pass by 'em unprovided, put the worst,
They should descry me.

There Is no trick in it Trapheire?

No more trick than you see; I prithee meet me in Fishstreet at the Feathers,
where we will dine; there thou shall see my friend, and I Will restore thy Cloak
dear Townshift


Well, thou shall have it -- Boy fetch
My Cloak and patches -- it is thine, there take it.

Gramercy; Is It hansome?

Very well; I must lie down and take a Nap at twelve;
I will not fail to meet thee.

Sirrah boy, be sure you wake him.

I warrant you sir.

Ha, ha, ha,
I Am sworn to cheat my father, and it is fit
He that first made the Gin should hansell it.

-- Sir, you are kindly welcome, and the oftener
You visit me, the welcommer you shall be;
I honor men of knowledge. Master Folly,
I am obliged to you for his acquaintance.

-- Geod feith sir, an he is worth yours; I sall play him wy any Anglish Dooctor
in the VVarld


Ne sir, Ise can dee mere than Ise speak sir.

-- I believe you sir,
By what I find of truth within my self;
I must confess, I am not altogether
So right as I would, my body tells me
I may admit of Physic.

Mickle we will sir.

I Am troubled with the Spleen, a strong disease
Amongst ns Magistrates, which makes me fear
It Is not for cure.

Ise cur it in two minutes gif ye ha
Bien trobl'd wy it twanty years, an aw
Your tribe gif tha'^ came toll me.

Ne, ne, he is reight.

You Will do a wondrous cure then.

I sall dee' to me honor; bet that is noot aw
Your Malade, ye are noot soound at heart sirs.

I know not that sir.

Planty an iddleness ha bred gross humors in you, whilke mon be pourged awey,
or elke ye dee for it; bet Ise sall ge ye that sir, sall mack ye bare an leight
enough


I thank you sir; accept this, pray, and I
Shall further gratify, but be speedy,
Good sir, with your Preparatives.

Ise gang aboot it stret, Ise gang aboot it sir.

Your servant Gentlemen, I shall hear from you sir.

Soon, mickle soon sir;
Leoke mon, leoke aw they bien sick o gis sike fin things as these, fiev golden
lads mon, fiev mere are worth a Leards land sir; geod feith gif their veins
wul ran sike droops as these wees drain um dry -- A simple feuls, that ken noot
when they are we will, bet wull bien wasting their means toll set their boodies
oout o frame -- a feuls, feuls


Ne matter mon gif oought can be gut wy putting um oout o fram, tha Deele try
his skill to put um in again for Iocky


Keep off firs -- keep off, ga me wund toll speak toll ye; Ise came for aw your
geods, mind ye me


Very well, very well.


Ise cur aw diseases, aw manner o Malades, an sall tack noought o ye for me
peyn bet your siller; Gif there bien er a Kirk Pressed among ye choked up wy
Pluraltes o Benefaits, tha Poowder in these pauper macks the Impostom breck, an
tacks aw awey clear -- Gif any Pressed bien vexed wy tha Babylonish mang, these
Purgation med in me non Contre, curs hum were he ner sa fer spent


For our Doctor sir, for our Doctor.


For our Vicar.


For our Parson.


For our Curat.


For our Bishop, Prebends, and Curates.


Gif any among ye bien troubled wy tha neyce o Organs in your lugs, these
poowder curs you for ever


For our Town sir.


For ours too sir.


And ours, and ours sir.


And our whole County sir.


Gif any among ye bien blind wy tha seight o Lawn sleeves, these cures and
restores ye


For my Landlord sir.


For mine too sir.


And mine.


And mine.


And mine.


Gif any among ye ha tha beon o a tith'd Soows babey stick in your wund pip,
these saw cur you stret, and tack aw awey


For me sir.


For me too sir.


And me sir.


And me sir.


And me sir pray.


Gif any among ye bien troubled wy heart burnings, tha Poowder in these pauper
curs ye stret


For my Neighbor sir.


And mine sir.


And mine too sir, I pray.


And some for our whole Town good sir.


Gif any o ye bien sore wy ore mickle burdens, an weary o your Riders, these
Poowder macks ye strong ta orethraw um, or ta bar greater


For us all sir.


Gif any o your stomachs bien oppressed wy Law, these pell sall remoove tha cause,
an tack it awey. Gif any bien hard boound, these sall mack mickle free


For my Landlord sir.


For mine too sir


And mine sir.


And mine sir.


And mine sir.


Gif any among ye bien trobl'd wy a scurvy mooth, these tacks aw felth awey.


For my wife sir.


For mine sir.


And mine sir.


And mine sir.


And my Mistress sir.


Gif any bien trobl'd wy a loosnes, these ties 'um fest as a Rope or hawter.


For my wife sir.


And mine sir.


And mine sir.


Geod People, noow I ha gau ye aw remedies ta your Malades, two dees hence Ise
sall bien her or noot ta sey whot operation they ha had upon ye; Ise sur ye
sall ha remedy or non; an sa far ye wall


Farewell sir, farewell.


A pretty place this.

But the Company!
The Company dear Coz hither resorts
Gives life and sweetness to it; the rarest wits!
So rare la man may lose himself ere he
Discover 'em -- for they are not to be --
Discovered -- Besides, the Women, Ladies,
Of such excelling beauty, you would swear
They painted -- and not be forsworn, as merry
As Cupid when he wantons.

And you spent
Your means amongst 'um?

And spent rarely well!
I Have no remorce for it. Can you sing?

Not I Coz.

How Coz? not sing! why then you are no Company;
We have a merry life so long as't lasts.
I Will lay my life you fence not neither.

Yes,
My grounds I do.

Have you the grounds of fencing? that is, to
Make the Passado, to retreive, comply,
Defend, make up, close, and Disarme;
You know not this I warrant?

Not I truly.

I cannot think what will become of you,
When you meet Men of valor.

I pray keep me
Out of their company, I love no quarrels;
I came to study the Law.

At a fine time.
You Have bought no Books I hope.

I, but I have.

Return them to the Bookseller for shame;
A Sword will prove more useful: hark ye Coz,
I am resolved to have you learn to fence.

I Would rather learn to sing.

That ye shall too:
Your money will do all things -- yonder is Townshift,
How like a Rogue he looks? I will not shun him.
And Cozen, as I was telling you

With your leave sir.

'Twas well asked sir,
What Is your will with me?

My Cloak sir -- where is my Cloak sir?

Even at the Brokers sir --

How -- you are a Rogue.

That Is nothing sir -- your railing will not fetch it out again.
Townshift I love thee, thou know I do.

A pox upon you.

Thou know the oath, I Am not to spare my Father.
And though we quarrel, yet we must not fight.
I Am punctual to my Oath; but if thou have
The conscience, I am ready.

Is he sunk for ever.

No, it may rise again, if you be civil.

Is that your friend?

And Kinsman.

Will thou cheat him too?

My Oath is past, I will not be forsworn
For a Kings ransom.

Nay then, I Am satisfied.

Come, be known to him -- Coz, this is my friend.

Sir, I kiss your hand.

I thank you heartily sir.

Fie Coz, fie, there is a complement.

He does not look as though he needed ought,
Save what thou wantst, a Cloak.

Good wit Coz, good wit.

Oh Rogue, how he claws him.

Where shall's dine?

I Will to the Ordinary.

Where?

In Fetter-lane.

To feed on Bruis, and be served with Linen
As sable as the chimney. No, weel take
A Coach, and hence to Fish-street.

What shall we do there?

Eat fish, the World does not afford the like.

But the Coach is costly,

Pough, I Will be at that;
It Is said the Milk of Asses, makes men fat.

FIE Mastres fie, geod feith you are mickle oout; I ga hum noought bet convenable
stooff


You Are a Rascal, a Scotch Horseleech, a Doctor, a Dolthead: Oh the madness of
the men of these times; if any of them be but a little out of temper, none can
set them right but a Scotch Doctor forsooth, as though all the English ones
were fools. But Sirrah, Sirrah, it is well known my husband


Geod Mistras hark ye toll me.

Hang you Rascal, my Husband was never troubled with whimsies in his head, nor
never railed against his Superiors; he was ever a quiet man, and an honest
man, and had the love of the whole Court, and so had I too. Many a good turn
have the good Gentlemen done me, which I must never expect now again, so
violently my Husband railes against the Government. But if he suffer for it,
thou shall not wear a Nose to thy face; a Nose on thy face said I: Nay if
there be a sign-post in all this Town I Will hang thee on it -- Ah poor heart

Here he comes -- See what a pickle you have put him in; My fingers itch to
come at thy face, that ugly


A me saw she is a Deele, and wull spell aw my Market gif I ser her noot lick
him; these gis o tha sem powder, whilke gif sha smell ta, wull mack her sa lick
him as may be


Sweet heart.

Oh, art thou there? it is well; there has bin nere
A Pursevant here yet to fetch me, has there?

A Pursevant for you! for what cause Husband?

I am too honest, that is cause enough.
There is a Council Table, Yes forsooth,
And at it is contrived men's ruins -- hah.
Who Is that? who is that? is it not for me they ask?
I shall be lost quite, if I look not well
About me.

True, you are in the way to undo
Your self, and me, and all your Family.
But this is thy Gin Rascal; Oh I could tear thee.

Mistras ga me whil toll speak toll ye; these wudnes o his, came fro tha
corruption o his heart: Aw that I ga hum was sike as these, be me saw smeel
Laddy, smeel Laddy


I have not Patience.

Ne, ne, be noot wud, smeel toll it.

My thinks it is very comfortable.

Hoow doll ye geod sir?

Oh Mr Doctor is it thee! art safe?
It Is wonderful there is nothing charged against thee!
There is an Office called the Green-cloth too,
Has no man had thee there yet?

They ken me sa weel sir -- It warks brawly.

Hark you Husband, what is that you said but now? I beleev't, what was it? the
King is pestilent, wilful; hah; I was it so? why then, for ought I know, he
must be beaten into better manners


Reight weel sed geod feith.

Honest Mr Doctor, pray come in sir;
You are the welcom'st man come to my house
This fortnight -- Husband love him, has he not
A taking countenance?

No body at the Gate?
I am possessed with fears and jealousies.

And well you may be Husband, I am sure
You have had cause enough, good Man, I grieve,
I grieve to think on it.

Mr Doctor, be advised;
Pray go not unprepared; to Night you shall
Take my house for your shelter, things work strangely.

Sweet Mr Doctor you shall be so welcome,
It passes; truly, you are a man upright
In every thing I warrant, pray come in sir.

Geod feith, tha cass is awter'd.

Bring forth your Prongs Neighbors; All men stand up for the truth: And he
that will lie on the Sunday, is not to be trusted the week after, what say you
Neighbors


I say a Sundaies lie may go as far as a work-daies, my reason is, it has more
leisure to travel


For my part neighbors let them lie that will I have no more to do with a
lie, then a lie has to do with me; if any lies with my wife, it shall go hard
but i will do as much with his


I, if he have none Neighbor.


Why, if he have none Neighbor, I must go without; no man will be a slave I
think


A slave! who has such a mind let him have it still: For my part Neighbors,
I Will work hard, earn my bread with the sweat of my brows, none shall eat away
the fruit of my labor, but I will sit down when it is done, and laugh, in
despite of all the Kasars in the World


Hold a pluck there Neighbor, it is ill playing with edge-tooles; that word
despite comes not in handsomely, and may bring us all to the Pot


What! have we a scab'd sheep amongst us? lets clear our flock of him.


Hold Neighbor, hold, I am for you with all my heart, but give me leave to
speak to you; I am but a fool it is confessed, but children and fools tell truth
sometimes, you know


And what of that, and what of that.


I say again, it is dangerous meddling with edge-tooles; there is store of trees
here abouts, and there may be Gibbets made of them, and you know well enough
what fruit Gibbets bring forth; I say no more, but be careful what you do


Away with him, away with him.


One word more Neighbors, one word more; it is not well to mock our
Superiors, much worse to threaten them: for as I have heard, there was a suit
at Law commenced about a Fart


Ha, ha, ha, how man, how!


Why, I will tell you Neighbors, be but patient; there was a fellow, I Will not
tell his name, was pissing against the wall, the Mayor came by, now you know
the Proverb, tell a tale to a Mare, and 'twill let a fart; but here the case
alters, for the fellow let the fart, and the Mayor took it in the nose, and
caused the fellow to be carried to the Town Hall, as Prisoner


The Mayor was a Horse, or a Whoreson knave, what is this to us?


Now toth' suit.

It Is worn out, weel have none on it.

Neighbors lay down your Prongs, take my devise;
It Is an old Proverb, be merry and wise.

Away with him, away with him, we will break the Cords of our slavery.


These gis tha Doctor, I tolled ye o sir, mickle wise an holy,
My non Contrymon ta sir.

Sir the Character
The Town receives of you, makes me ambitious
Of your Acquaintance.

I complamen noot sir, Ise doown reight Scot;
Aw verety an honesty.

The better sir.
That language is the freest from deceit,
That carries most simplicity.

Ne, ne, Ise noot sa sample neder.

Pardon me;
I speak not in that sense, but have regard
Unto the Metaphor; I don't conclude,
'Cause the Organ of the soul may be infected,
The soul must be imperfect; for I Have known
Men rarely endu'd, that Nature has denied
The benefit of expression to.

You Are a Scollard sir.

And I presume you one. I have read something
Of the Metaphysics, though I took not on me
The function, or the practice: But, no more
Of that sir, it is not wisdom in a man
Unskil'd, to hold a weapon against a Fencer.

Mickle weel sed geod feith.

All my Discourse
Draws to this Period; that is, you would be pleased
T'afford me your opinion; some thing I aile,
But know not what, save this, a deprivation
Of breath, and find it prejudicial to
My Calling.

You ha bad lungs sir, whilk macks ye short wound.

I could have told you that sir; My defect
Proceeds from thence; but for the Remedy --
I know my failings.

You Will faw sir intoll a Consumption very soon sir, gif ye tack noought ta keep
ye fro it; Aw the dreggs o Rome mon be taken fro ye


Gead feith, gif he tack ye in hand sir, you are aw hole.


You Are ta fat at heart sir, Pluraletes bred bet iddlenes, an iddlenes, bad
humors; ye mon keep a spar diet sir, an be brought lo wi Purgations sir, an
when tim sers ha sim Comfortives sir


Sir, I shall trust my body to your Care.

Bet Ise net trust me saw to yours.

Sir, Mr Soongul'd desires you would come with the Doctor to him presently.


I sal swett heart, my Jo; Doctor, you mon ta Mr Soongul'd wi me.


You are sent for sir, I see.

Bet I sal ha ye in mind sir.

As soon as may be -- farewell sir.

Fer noot sir, fer noot.

This is the best Room Gentlemen.

It stinks of Tobacco, don't it Coz?

How Tobacco!
Tobacco is Companion for a Prince.

I take none though.

Then you want education; fill Boy, fill.
Townshift to thee.

Let it come.

Sir, there is some Gentlemen in the next Room desires your Company.


What are they?

I think their names be Drawforth and Pinckcarcase.

Plain Drawforth and Pinckcarcase; well admit them.
Shall it be so Coz?

I hope there'l be no quarrelling.

What if there be?
Have you not here your men of Iron by you.
Can you be better backed and brested sir;
Townshift, the Rogues have got a Bubble.

The more the merrier -- your servant,
Gentlemen.

This is our friend, and desires your Acquaintance.

Gentlemen, a man of worth, I Will assure you.

What Country man I pray sir?

An Essex man sir, your servant.

The better flesh I Will warrant.

I know not that sir, I have near bin tried.

Not near shall be for me.

Drink, drink about.

To thee Drawforth.

A health to thy friends Mistress.

Well done, about with it.

I thank you Gentlemen.

What! not begin another?

I Have drank too hard already; this same glass and no more:
Gentlemen, your Ladies health sir.

Why Traphiere, whence this gallantry?

What an idle question
Is that of thee; why, who should do it, but this?
He sent his Tailor to take measure of
The buildings of our bodies.

And the appurtenances
Came to us by like Providence.

Drink, drink about.

Coz, let me give thee over our Wine some Counsel;
You are a landed Man, be careful what
Strange Company you keep; for there are Cheats,
And desperate Cheates abroad, will make no Conscience
To bring you into Bonds, and make you sell
Or morgage all you have; take heed good Coz,
What Company you keep.

He that cheats me, shall have good luck Coz.

When does your Tailor fit your body with
A fashionable suit; this bears an Antique
And worn-out date. A gentleman of your Fortunes
And walk so like a Cow-driver.

I will have one against Sunday.

Some six yards makes me one too, let it be so; hah!

The like proportion fits me, twelve, us both.

Well it shall be done Gentlte-men --

Drink, drink about, your friend is gone.

I Will send yours after him.

I-must-be-gone, 'tis-late.

No sure. What, by thy Watch?

The hand is upp-on-on-twel-ve.

A pretty Watch, I prithee lend it me,
To have another made by.

Tis-a-Watch-of Price-Coz.

I would not borrow it else.

What store of Chink have you?

Money-enough, mony-enough.

Lend me a piece or two.

There-there Boy.

The like to me sir, come, I shall, I shall.

There-sir. Ile-be gone --

The house, the house, to pay.

Twenty two shillings and you are welcome Gentlemen.

make it up five and twenty, and you two shall cast Dice which pays it -- are
all parties agreed -- I know


Nor ours; Heroic spirit will thou?

Here Is more wine Gentlemen.

About with it, about with it.

The Dice, the Dice.

Come it is a good throw Coz.

But that is better sir; your friend paies.

Hang him he cheated, he is a cheat.

Nere go not I, Gentlemen.

You lie, you lie.

How the lie? will you take that?

How shall-I-help it pray?

Well done Coz.

-- Hang him he's-but a Country puppy Calfe.

Throw a Pot at's head.

I shall-not-hit-him. If-I-doe; I am-no-more
Puppy-then your self --

Why, that was well done.

Ile-kick you sirrah -- I learn'd-that of-you Coz --

Gallants expect to hear from us, and suddenly.

A Coach there.

I hope, they -- wait -- not for us -- hah!

What if they do? we fear em not, pay, pay;
Boy there is your reckoning. Call a Coach Boy.

Ha ye wark for a Scot Sawger, wha ha bien aw tha Wirld ore ons ten toes; Ser'd
aw Religions, an can tha better be o any. I ha killed tha Whar a Babylon, Body
an Saw, brent aw her Rawlecks wi tha feer o zeal. I can carry two feces under
won hood: I can be a Sent, an I can be a Deel, gif ye ha wirk for me; I ha
seem a power a riches in me dees, but ha broought noought heom wi me bet St
Andras Cross, want an Poverty


A sir! the bonny siller came a piece, gif I tol'd um a tale, thay'd ga mickle
heeds; geod feith won pell set'd aw malades


An whot pell wos thot mon?


The Pell o sedition.


A, ken you thot mon? tha sam set tha Magistrate an's wife intoll fears an
jealousies, turned tha insid o tha Kirkmon ooutwards, an noow's aw gall, tha
Ceteson gis as bitter; tha Leyer cannot stond he is brought sa week wy me
Purgations, and tha Curtier noot worth tha grond a goes on; I ha let aw his
geod as we will as he is bad bleod oout


Saw ye Gentlemen gif ye ha a mind ta bien sawed, ken ye me sirs?


How sud we ken thee mon?


Wha, noot Scarefool your Contremon?


Whar have bien mon?


Aw tha Wirld ore sirs, an noow aw pleces are wary o me; Ise came ta Anglond
toll seek wirke


Here Is wirke enoough gif ye bien wise ta deele wy tha Anglish mon.


Geod feith Ise chet'um they wern ner sa cheted, show me toll'um, whar liew
they


In the Cety, and Contre ta; marry, bet came awey wy us mon, wees tack a drinck
first, an tawke mere on it


Came awey Io, came awey.


DOwn with this Babell-builder, this Court pride,
Dagon and his Idolaters shall down.

I, down with them husband, down with 'em, they have stood long enough; I am sure
their long standing have made you come short many a time and often, but I hope
now husband you will take 'em down a Button hole lower


Am not I a man?


You think so husband, I warrant.


Why, a King's no more.


Nay, is he that husband? troth I dare say our man William is as good a man as
the best of you; for as they say, a man is a man and he has but a hose on's
head


Well, I am resolved William shall forth.


Forth, how do you mean forth? I hope you will not leave me unprovided at
home; you know your own business abroad, and I am certain he can do your
business at home better than your self -- oh husbund, husband here is the Scotch
Doctor


Mr Doctor, what news Mr Doctor?


Nen geod sir, nen geod sir, bet me frond ha had hes cass pulled ore his lugs.


By whom, by whom?


Wha, wha, bet tha prod Prelates sir; Ise tolld 'um o their knavery, an they
gar tack awey me brawery; bet thoough they ha tacken awey me Cot, they sall ner
ta^k awey me conscience, that is holl an sound, an ned nen o their pachings o
their preachments


O wicked, wicked children of darkness!


Here Is a frond o min sir, a mon a meight an mettell, wha ha endured meny a
brunt and storm, he sall stond betwixt ye in aw harm


I shall be glad of your acquaintance sir.


True, truly sir, you have a face like a man, you will do the business I warrant,
let you alone, but gently to the women sir, for we are twigs, and may be bowed
which way you list; mere tender twigs sir


Bred, bet sam o ye bien toough enoough.


We are a long time indeed a bringing up, but then we are soon cast down;
women have tender hearts, and tender flesh, and tender consciences, though
naughty men report that we have none; husband shall they walk into th'Parlor; I
do love to enter into Dialogue with these Gentlemen, they talk so prettily


I, with all my heart.


You will meet with sir fine Plunder among the Ladies; you shall dine with us
too -- you may make me amends with a Court smock; I look to wear one in truth,
they are so fine and so perfumed, it passes


Come sir, we will discourse of our affairs
After w'ave dined -- you will dine with us too Gentlemen?

Wees tack ye ot yar word.


Nay, you may do it sirs, you may do it, you have warrant for it; it is well enough
known, the Pomp of the Prelates, the Whore of Babylon her self in her
feathers, the Kings of the earth commit fornication with her Plu^alities of
Benefices makes men but idle, says Mr Doctor, and idleness makes you fat, and
fat makes you pursy, and so by consequence short winded; It is a trick of Rome
to starve our Religion; Let Iezabell be brought before the Elders, and the
whore of Babyilon to the Whipping post, let her have lash upon lash; let her
smock be given to the Rag-men, it may come to be Paper, and her Condemnation
writ in it; let the Whelps and the Cubs be brought to the Stake, baite'um,
baite'um, baite'um, I am your warrant says Mr Doctor


Master Doctor's an Ass.


Children you talk not like men, you are but midling Christians, it is well
known to the Parish


That Bedlams fit for you.


Those that will follow me, let 'um follow me,

I am now for the Truth,
And the Covenant in sooth.

Hi, hi, hi, Stow the Friar, stow the Friar.


You see what he has brought me to, my Crutches;
I was ere held an able man you know;
Had my tongue at Command, and my head too,
But now they both are so enfeebled I
Have scarce the use of either; if I had
It were all one, the Country People are
Bewitched into belief, they have as much
Reason and Law as I, and will become
Their own Sollicitors, and Council too.
I cannot last long, but expect still when
My Crutches will deceive me, and I fall
To the ground for ever.

-- I am brought to nothing
As Well as you, I little thought a Scotchman
Could ere have dreind my Veins, and purse so dry,
I am not worth the ground I go on; so
Dejected are my thoughts; my spirit lost,
And all the hopes of my recovery
Extinct and buried.

I should not have known you,
Had you not told me who you were; you are
So changed from your self. Oh those were times,
Worthy to call to mind, (though to our grief)
When you and I, like Twins, derived a being
From one another sustenance, the Monopolies
That you projected, and I perfected!
Like two expert Limners, the one employed
To fashion the face, the other to finish it.

-- I, those were times indeed, but all I got
Then, has been since consumed; and I guess
You are not much the better; I am weary
I protest of my life, and would thank him
Would do me so much good as take it from me.

-- Patience is the best remedy where no
Better can be obtained; it is vain to crave
The thing we want when it is not to be had;
Your dancing days are done, and all the breath
The Scot has left me scarce will heat my fingers.

-- And my affliction does the more increase
To see my friends disabl'd, as I am,
From helping one another, it is a grief
That Is inexpressible, and not for cure.

-- What Fortune sowres, content must sweeten, he
Is the best man o'rcomes his misery.

-- For my part, I am but a man, and I owe but a death, let them take it, as
they say they will, give 'um good on it, let them come, let them come -- where
are they? stand, stand, stand


Husband now you talk of standing, pray let me lie down, and then let 'em do
their worst, I defy 'em


-- And so do I, we will to the Terret, Woman, and there we are secured against
Devil, and Pursevant


-- I Am wearied off my legs with doing nothing but running up and down in every
Nooke and Corner like a Rat for fear of catching


-- They are coming, they are coming; let me come in woman, let me come in.


I would you would come in husband once, you have been out long enough to small
purpose I Am sure


Believe it, their Design aims at our ruin;
And though the Cord they make be somewhat finer
Than Ordinary, 'Twill choke us at the last;
I hold a naked freedom better far
Than an adorned Prison; golden fetters
And Iron ones produce a like effect,
What differs them's but curiosity.

Into what a Lethargy has these rabble Scots
Betrayed the peoples senses? tell them on it
And they will abuse you for it. Nay, though they see
Distraction brought unto their very doors,
They Will look on it, and not know it till they feel it,
And then will tamely kiss the Rod that whipped 'em.
A Nation proud and Arrogant as the Beggar,
That when h'as got a Bonnet 'bove his wearing,
Will scarce bow to the Giver. All the service
They ever did this Nation was to help
The people eat their victuals, and share their fortunes.

They Are good for naught, but to eat, louze, and sleep,
And stinck a street up. Tell you stories of
Don John of Austria, the Magull, great Cham,
Their valor at Madril, Levant, or where
You will, and this in some blind Chimney Corner
In fume and smoke, roused up with lanted Ale,
'Till that their faces do resemble the Towns
They set on fire; And yet dare not encounter
A Rat or Weesell.

-- Yet the world reports
Them, men for siege the best, and can endure
The greatest hardship.

Very true, if they
May but ly still they will feed on one another,
Rather than venture on their Enemy
To get the least Provision, and indeed
The worst will serve their turn, for they are men
Loves any thing but beating, yet they will take
That too if need be; take'em down a little,
And you may fillip dead a score of them.
It is a shame the English should become
Such mules to such base burdens; I Am resolved
To turn the Chance o'th'Dy that favors them,
Though to the hazard of my being.

-- 'Twill
Be taken a piece of service fit for Chronicle,
And you shall want no furtherance.

If I bring not
The Soldier, Doctors, and their Crew of Cheaters
As tamely to be hanged as puppy Dogs,
Let me recelve no credit from you after.

Sir, though I hate your Bulls, and your Decoyes,
And know you have two ends to all your ways;
I fear you not, for Truth will show her self
Inspight of all the clouds you cast upon her.

You are in th'right. Truth will appear, and that
To th'shame of your trimmed Covenant; for though
She be but plain, she is more glorious
Than all the gloss and Colors that sets forth
That new devise, Created to deceive
Poor simple people, and at last your selves.

These are but bandying, I Will pursue my wager.

I Will venture ten pound more you are lost in weight.

You Will lose your self sir with your confidence.

Bar treachery and I care not.

I cannot endure this fighting Coz, a Dad.

Pox take your Dad; is that an Oath for a Gentleman?
A Lad at ten swears more profoundly; you will
Be quarrelling, and then you dare not fight;
As though I were a wall of Steel or Brass,
To stand betwixt you, and receive the Darts
Cast at you; Sir, why did your Cowship send
An Answer to your Challenge, if you found
Your blood so Cool and Phlegmatic?

'Twas your doing, -- I had not had the heart else.

For preservation of your honor sir
Could you do less than Answer him?

What was he
That brought the Challenge?

Pinckcarcase by name.

A devilish name, and full of devilish ends;
This fighting is not lawful; prithee Coz
Take up the matter, I have little maw to it.

What, now the Hostage Reputation
Is past, will you Recant, Reneage, Revoke,
Recoyle, Revert? stand to your Principles.

I shall not stand an inch of ground believe me.

It Is pity thou art worth any; let me see,
How shall we do it with Honor?

It Is no matter
For that thing Honor; let her walk alone,
I don't desire her Company on such terms,
Sweet Coz, sweet Coz.

Let me see -- I Am resolved
That you shall fight him.

Coz, I had forgot
I swear, a strange infirmity, that is
I zound when as I hear a Gun shot off*
And tremble at a Pistols, all my senses
Become as useless.

Why, 'twas your own motion.

No matter, it is but so much charges lost,
I will not fight with Bullets, I Have more conscience.

Why, then you must prepare a Case of Rapiers,
For Townshift and my self, ours are grown dull
With often usage.

Oh, the better Coz!
They Will do less mischief.

Then your fencing Master
Must make you at your Chamber fit for the field.

That Is past his skill I Am sure; more charges Coz.

It cannot be avoided, if you mean
To fight on foot, and put off your Horse combat.

In my mind it is horse-play to fight on foot;
But hark you Coz, don't you make winking at
That Weapon ye call sharp, I Am not so set.

Fie, winking, No, how will you see to hit him;

No matter so he hit not me; but may not I
Bar Points being the Challenged?

That Is base, and Player-like.

I Would rather play so, than work otherwise.

Come, come, resolve, you know the time draws near.

I would it did not, I love not to think on it;
Can we throw nothing in Times-way to make
Him stumble, and stop a little.

Resolve upon your weapon ere he be
Furnished with horse and Pistols.

I Will lay my life he is that already, then
'Twill be unworthy in you to --

Good sir, talk not to me of Worthies, my Father was none of the Nine; he never
kept Company with your Huffs, nor Puffs; be could drink in a Tavern and never
quarrel about the Reckoning; he lived without knocks, and died in the love of
his Parish


But he has left a quarrelsome son behind
Must pay for all.

I sha'n't stand much upon
That point, so I may be discharged from beatings;
Methinks a skin set out with Eylet holes
Appears not handsome, nor a face to be
Painted with black and blew, I hate those colors.

What will you give him shall take up the business without loss to your honor?


A man cannot lose
That which he never had; My Father was
A man of Bags, and might have been a Knight
When Knighthoods went a begging.

But to the matter,
What say you to my proposition?

Troth,
It sounds well, let me see now what in Conscience
You will demand?

But twenty pieces.

So;
To save a man from beating, very good I
How many such do you meet with in the year?

Hundreds, hundreds sir.

Men must live Coz, men must live.

Any where but on me (good Coz;) but sir,
Before my Coz here, I Will give you ten.

Ten is too little in all conscience Coz.

Consider sir the danger.

And the Charge
Already I Have been for horse and Pistols;
But those I hope you will return me, when
The peace is made.

Not one, expect not one,
They Are forfeit Goods to us Lords of the Soil.

It Is true, you have been at charges, and for that
Reason I Will undertake it at your rate;
Forbib, but I should bear a Conscience too.
Meet us at the Mairmaid.

At the hour of twelve.

The precise time.

Cozen, he will deserve it.

Would I had his Art
To live by when I and my fortunes part.

He is the Challenged, and justly may
Design the way of fighting, and the Place;
But though you have provided us with Horses,
Swords, Pistols, and so forth, yet there is a thing
Called money, we do want, put case he should
Fall by your hand, in what a case were we?

Suppose that you should fail;
-- I, there is the Danger.

We must fly for it, and that we cannot do
Conveniently, without a sum, the Oratory
Of Silver makes our passage free and safe,
The want of it detaines us; open, open
Your close-mouth'd bags, and let them speak to us.

Troth Gentlemen, I Will tell you, and I lie not,
They Have got a hoarsenesse since they came to Town,
And speak so low, a man can hardly hear 'em.

One Mortgage sir will raise their voice again.

Well, well, he might have taken another way
To work; had I been he, and he been me,
I would have asked him Mercy.

But you see
He is a man of spirit, spirit, sir!

I would he had no more then I, a gnat
Is better furnished; I have heard my Mother
Protest, and solemnly, I had a heart
No bigger than a hazell Nut.

-- Why, saw she't?

No, but she felt it; it is an imperfection
In Nature I cannot help, and it is as cold
I warrant as a Cucumber.

And rises
So little in your stomach!

Troth, as little
As may be sir; how shall I heat it Gentlemen?

Drink wine and Drab.

Why, so I do you know;
Yet when the flame of drinking's o'r, I fall
Into the Noose of Taverns, like a Pigeon.

Only then y'ad best fight when you are drunk.

And so.
Be hanged when I am sober; no, I bear
Too great a Conscience.

If it be a burden
Too hard to bear, we will teach you how to throw
It off, and live as we do without any.

Take up this quarrel Gentlemen, and have
My heart for ever.

What to do, to throw
The hounds ye starve? yet that so little, 'twill
Not be a mouthfull; it is your money we
Value the most, let your heart go as't came.

Why, I shall mortgage next week.

Are you serious?
May we give credit to you?

I Have occasion.

Thou shall have more rather than want; my Buliy,
We are thy Guardians, who assaults our ward
Suffers, unless he be on a sure Guard.

BRed, those Anglish ar Deeles, we are aw lost men; Aw oour knavery is oout, nen
wull tack oour parts; Tha Ceteson^ hong their heds doown lick bull rushes, an
won noot bien sen for us


Hoow came they in tha Deeles namsa aw o won mind? Ise sur Ise ded whot Ise cud
toll mack 'um ^et on oder ta deeth; tha Deele feere 'um, thar lick Serpans that
gif ye smit 'um asunder wull join again


We Are aw lost, sheft, sheft, tha Deeles a coming toll tare tha Covenant sha
year heels, sha year heels, spang awey sirs, spang awey


On's gif tha men o War flee, what sall we hid our sells -- Aw sir; sir.


Take them into your Custody, they are Your lawful prize.


A sirs, a sirs, geod feith wees meant ne bad.


What Mr Doctors! have we found ye? who can cure the Citizen of his head ach
but the Scotch Doctors? who their wives of the Toothache but the Scotch
Doctors? the Scotch Doctor is all in all, the Kirk will take no Physic but of
the Scotch Doctor; the Country will be cheated by none but by the Scotch
Doctor; the Court and Gentry will be beggered by none but the beggarly Scotch
Doctors; come away and be hanged


Mercy sirs, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy.


Hawd, hawd, hawd sir.


Nay, I don't intend
To take the advantage of you as I may,
I owe a greater honor to true valor;
I have heard Nobly of your Countrymen,
And therefore to assure my self Report
Lies not, I have exposed my Person to
This single hazard.

A sir* I dee leov you.

And I shall love you too, if that I find
You prove as Gallant as you have spoke your self:
Consider what dependances are on you,
Whom you have involved by your large promises
To this Engagement; let them see you dare
Do something for their money.

Be me saw sir
You Are a mickle Gallant mon, Ise thra me swerd an heart at your non feet sir.


That Is base, not Souldierlike; submissiveness
In this Case speaks you Coward, and if so,
My breath has been ill spent; what, will you fight?

Noot a neustye sir, geod feith I leove a Anglish mon wy aw my heart. A sir, A
sir, send aw reight, send aw reight -- her tack me weppon, Ise your non
Prisoner sir geod feith


Since thou art so base,
And not fit for a Noble Treaty, take
This, this, and this.

A geod sir, use me like a Gentlmen.

A Gentleman, a Swineheard, hangye, go,
The Bubbles broke, the wind gave Being to.
You Are welcome Gentlemen, show a Room there Boy.

Sirrah, there will some Gentlemen ask for us,
Direct 'em hither.

I shall sir; what is your wine?

Sack, Boy, the quickening sack; and such Tobacco
As may inspire a spirit into clay,
Quick, and as sharp as lightning.

Oh good sir,
I cannot endure to think upon a storm;
Talk not of lightning, it does bode some quarrelling;
The calmest language is the best, when there is
A peace intended.

Here they come; now Coz
For your honor seem somewhat averse
To an agreement; carry your self stoutly,
With an unaltered Countenance.

It Is not in
The power of humane frailty.

-- Gallants, welcome;
You Are men I see for Credit.

What must I say?

Carry your self manly.

What would I give now for an Inch of manhood;
How he does eye me; would I had a look
But half so piercing, I Would encounter then
With Basilisks; It carries daggers in it
Will penetrate a Coat of Male; there is
No safety but in distance.

How he looks at me!
With such a hungry countenance, as though
He meant to satisfy himself upon me;
But if he knew but what a piece of flesh
He had to deal with, he would not be so greedy;
I was not cut out for a Royster; sure
Nature never meant me for the field, unless
To call my Cattle home, or try my hounds.
I am so great an enemy to a sword
I wear none when I ride; Oh, how yon fellow
Would spurn me, like a Mushrome, could he get
Me but alone; but he shall be hanged first.

What, all this while and speak not to each other?
Why, you have hearts of Oak: Not bow, dear Coz!

I cannot help it.

Come, we must have you friends.

With all my heart sir.

How Is this? the man's bewitched;
See what the Gold can do!

If you please sir, I am your humble servant.

And what say you Coz?

Hum, I smelt, it is so,
The fellow is a Coward on my life.
Are they not all so? it is a blessing then.

Come sir, our friend is willing to pass by
All the affronts you gave him, if you will wave
His Challenge.

I Will wave nothing but my Sword
Against my Enemy.

Shall we be friends?

A friendly blou^d runs not yet current in me;
Be challenged by a dunghill Cock? I scorn it.

Why, this is rare! Coz, I Will spit in thy mouth.

Sir, it is your friends desire as well as ours
To prevent bloodshed.

-- Let such things as you,
That dare not waste their blood be sparing on it;
For my part, I Will not value if he Tap
From me a Pailefull.

Who the Devil Conjured
Up such a spirit in him?

Your friend's grown --
Take him down, or by this light
I Will kick him.

Pough, let me alone for that.

The Gentleman grows angry, I Will be gone.

Hang him, a Coward, a mere Coward, friend*

How, a coward! he speaks not like one;
I would his hands were tied behind him, I
Would make a trial on it; but he has teeth
Strong as the tusks of Boares, and legs more stiff
And big then any Bedspost, I should do
no good upon him.

Come Coz, throw
Your Ranting habit off, the Scene of War
Is past, and now put on your Robe of Amity,
The Bride-garment of Peace.

-- Peace! who shall peace?
It Is sawciness to tell me so.

How Is this!
You worm! 'slight, if I lay my hands
Upon you once, I Will tear you into nothing*
You Cowardly simple Puppy. Sir, I Will --

Not so loud good Coz;
You know I have but followed your directions.

Be hanged, and overdone it, have not you sirrah?
The Gentlemen shall know you have not spirit
To look a Cat in th'face, if that you ben't
More sociable.

-- Good Cozen, I Will do any thing.

Well, I have brought him to it with much ado;
Here, shake hands, sir; you must be friends.

Well, if I must, I must, patience is a virtue,
And I Will embrace it -- I am your friend sir.

I shall never be your foe sir.

So said, and so done sir, will do well.

The Rascal acts it handsomely.

To your credit:
Ours is the silliest Rogue.

Boy, more wine;
Would we had Music here to celebrate
This Nuptial.

I will send for some.

Do so; come, here is to the Married Couple.

I do believe we both cannot got a Boy
Will prove a Soldier.

Ah sirrah, are you there?

I am your own man sin.

Let Us have a good Air, but drink first.

Drink about Gallants, what the Music duls you;
Have e're a new song fellow?

Yes, of the Scots coming into England.

That, that by all means.

Please you to hear me -- it is but a Ballad put to
One of their own tunes.

The better, the better, let us hear't.

Came lend, lend you are lugs Ioes, an Ise speak a song,
Sing he heom again Iocky, sing heom again Iocky.
O hes bonny deeds, an hes prowes among;
Sing heom again, heom again, O valent Iocky.
Sirs Iocky's a Mon held o mickle Note,
Sing heom again* Iocky, etc.
The breech o tha Covenant stuck in hes throat;
Sing heom again, heom again, etc.
For Iocky was riteous, whilke ye wad admire;
Sing heom again, etc.
He fooght for the Kirk, bet a plundered tha Quire;
Sing heom again, heom again, etc.
An Iocky waxt roth an toll Anglond a came,
Sing heom again, etc.
Ero whance he would return, bet a lack a is Lam;
Sing heom again, etc.
An Iocky was armed fro top toll toe,
Sing heom again, etc.
Wia power o Men, anth' are geod Deuke I tro;
Sing heom again, etc.
Sa valent I wis they were, an sa prat,
Sing heom again Iocky; etc.
Ne cock nor hen durst stond in their gat;
Sing heom again, heom, etc.
In every street they ded sa flutter,
Sing heom again, etc.
Ne Child dorst shaw hes bred an butter;
Sing heom again, etc.
Noow when oour ferces they herd on over night,
Sing heom again, etc.
Next morn they harnest themsels for a fight;
Sing heom again, etc.
Their Deuke was tha mon that wad be sen stoote,
Sing heom again etc.
He feec^ us a while, stret twurn'd Arss aboot;
Sing heom again, etc.
Our men that ater these valent Scot went,
Sing heom again, etc.
Had ner fond him oout bet by a strong sent.
Sing heom again heom again, o valent Iocky.
Ha, ha, ha! it is good enough for the subject,

Drink about, drink about; More wine Boy;
Here Witwud to thee.

Let Us discharge the Music.

With all my heart.

There ye Rascals.

Thank you Gentlemen.

Trapheire to thee.

Let it come, a Pint and thou dare.

Art mad, Trapheire is drunk enough, he will be
Not'company for a Dog immediately.

To your Mightiness sir.

I shall pledge your Highness sir -- to you sir.

Excuse me pray sir, I am almost spent.

Not pledge me!

No, he shall not pledge you sir;
What then? he is my friend.

But why should he
Be more excused then ours? will you drink for him?

Not, neither sir.

Then he shall pledge me sir.

He shall not sir.

Nay Trapheire, what do mean?

Hang him turd -- Are you good at that sir?
I shall return you Answer by this Messenger.

Good Coz no fighting; I will drink a Gallon
Rather than lose one drop of blood -- It is
Too precious for the floor to drink.

Gentlemen your noise has drawn Soldiers into the house, th'a^e coming up; as
many as can get into that little Closet


I would not be in custody for a Million;
The Rode, the Rode --

That Is all our faults, in, in.

Where shall we be?

Where Is all these Huffs -- what you two make this noise? hurl Pots, break
Glasses, you are youths indeed; Is this a time of night for you to rant in?
come you must with us


Nay good Gentlemen.

Gentlemen, you may come forth, the coast is clear.


Where Is the two Gentlemen?


They have taken 'em with 'em.


Did they pay the Reckoning.


No sir.


A pox upon you, why did you not aske'em for it?


I durst not sir, for fear they should say, the rest of their Company was
above


It Is right, the Devil's on it, this was your doing Trapheire, Will you pay the
Reckoning now


Not a penny, I Will keep unto my Oath, throw who shall dip or pay if you will.


Here Is Dice, throw -- twelve, hang ye Rascal


Mine is the worst.


But mine is the worst of all -- Sirrah Boy will you take this Cloak for your
Reckoning


I know not sir whether I shall or not.


You shall not sir, now, you know, as long as such Spankers last; what is to pay?


But thirty shillings sir.


Death! but thirty say thou? well, there it is;
I shall be even with some body.

Why, this was handsome Trapheire.

Make room for the Magistrates;
The Prisoners
There --

Which are
The Prisoners?

These sir.

Mercy, mercy, Master Judge.

What are those?

The subjects on the which these Villains practiced their subtilties and
deceits; first, I shall tender my Charge against 'em, then produce my evidence


Very well, very well, proceed.

In brief (Sir) then they have infected most
Part of this Nation; here is a thing,
A man of Reputation once, and bore
A place amongst you.

I do pity him.

And now is fit for no place except Bedlam:
Here is another, a man you would think
The Devil could not work upon, and yet
These Scotch ones have. The Lawyer, father of
Contrivances, is noos'd in one himself;
He cannot stand without his Crutches, and
His head's so light his nose is every minute
Ready to touch the ground.

What is that Gentleman?

Do you conceive him one? have they left ought
Upon him like a Creature? may we swear
He is a perfect man, no Ghost? it is hard.
The hurryings he has had with sleepless eyes,
Continual Purgations, Bleedings, what not,
That they could but invent to bring him low;
He Is all is left of a Courtier, and deserves
Your pity; there is no double doors betwixt
His heart now, and your eyes; he is so transparent
You may see through him. It Is not these alone
They Have brought to this, but all the Country people,
Both Common sort, and Gentry.

What say you for yourselves?

Mercy, mercy, mercy, wees leove tha Anglish mickle we will.


Yes, it appears so; we will requite your Loves,
But cannot say, with your own Coin, because
You never were worth any, but we will find
A way to pay you home.

When they had thus
Spread their infection, they begin to think
Their safety would not last without the Soldier;
And to that end and purpose does persuade
The giddy People, which they had before
Distempered, with their Poisons, to receive
This man of Feather, as their grand Protector:
They take him, and to Covenant they go;
Two hundred thousand pounds! (a sum would buy
Their Kingdom) must be raised and paid to them.

Very fine.

But mark sir the event,
I am resolved to open what they did
For all this Money.

'Twill do well indeed.

They gave a piece of Paper, in the which
Were strange things promised then, As if that all
The Courage of the world contracted were
In their, and but their Nation.

And what found you?

I now proceed to that; I found'um sir,
Like Bull-rushes, that tremble if the wind
But blow on them, they run and tumbled over
The necks of one another, like to tiles
A storm forces from houses tops; this any thing
But man, who owned the name of their Protector,
In the most abject'st manner, and beneath,
The Spirit of a man, threw at my feet.
His Sword, and himself too, on single terms,
Without a stroke; Scarefoole they call him, and
They must be Citizens or none that fear him;
A Rat shall make him run to his own Country.

Ise a Gentlemon sir, mind ye me? Ise gange toll me non
Contre wy aw me heart gif ye wul.

Not in such haste sir, we will reserve you for
Another purpose -- take him hence to prison.

The faw Deele fire thot tongue.

What think you sir that Paper, cost so much,
Is worth in weight? here is one will tell you sir.

I am a public Notary by profession,
And dare speak nothing but the truth; the wager
Past on this Gentleman's side, the Popes Bull weighed,
It down by much, the other was not worth
In weight a Penny loaf.

Ha, ha, ha!

But what make you here sir?

Not to do harm sir.

Stay not here upon
Your peril sir, your Bulls have too long tails.

I stay but for a wind sir.

I must confess we have been much deluded,
Cheated, and Cozened by these perjured Scots,
Under the show of zeal and honesty.

Hang 'em Rogues, they complain they are pillaged, you made 'em not bare
enough sirs, you should have taken their skins off too, they would have made
monsters of us, but truly my husband is a Natural man, and I am his own wife;
I hope you do not think we are otherwise than we should be


I have a husband here too, help his head, he was a Man once, and I was a
Woman, as this Gentleman the Courtier knew well enough, but now I am nobody,
thank yo^ pick-purses; Pray spare 'em not, I Am sure they would not spare me
when time was, do what I could


Take them hence, there will be order shortly
To pack 'em to some foreign parts, they are
But Caterpillars, and what place soever
They come at will be the worse for it; take 'em hence.

A mercy, mercy, mercy.

You have done Justice.

You Have seen these Scots desected, Gentlemen,
And what d' you find 'em now to be, but Rascals?
Mere Mountebanks, that has instead of Cure
Bred strange Diseases, and distempers amongst you;
Juglers, that looked you in the face, and told
You a fine tale, to keep your senses busy,
While they did pick your Pockets.

Our Pockets say you sir? I, and something else too, could
They have come at it; but soft, soft, two words to a bargain.

Master Smallfaith, we shall do what lies in us,
Upon your Recantation, to bring
You into favor with the Common Wealth,
And seat you as before, as Capable
Of her Preferment.

I thank you.

Blessing on your hearts.

We make the same profession sir to you,
On the like terms. You may do much
Upon the giddy People, by the example
Of your own Reformation.

Sir, I shall
Do what befits an honest man (abused)
And servant to the Common Wealth.

And you sir,
Are not exempted here the benefit
Of favor if you will take hold of it.

I thank you.

I, and hold it fast husband; had I a good thing to handle, I Would make much on it
a long time I warrant you


As for these Gentlemen here, Master Downfall,
And Master Worn-out, we shall do our best
To set the one upon his legs again;
And restore the other, though not to his full
Ability, yet to a health contentable.

We are your servants.

When all our minds and hearts are firmly knit,
Let the Scot do his worst, by Sword or Wit.


