Enraged to find you never do come near
The Theater, but when New Plays are here;
I Am come to tell you with a serious Face,
Loathing of Wit does show a want of Grace.
The Time has been, when Sense has so prevailed,
That of full Houses we have never failed,
The Boxes still with Beauties filled; the Pit
Was crowded every day with Men of Wit;
The Galleries served for poor unthinking Citt.
Side-Boroughs stowed Masks, and keeping Cullies;
And the Stage kept free from Beaux and Bullies:
There was some other Vermin up and down,
But they for fear of losing Half a Crown,
Prepare for flight, like Owls at Evening Dawn,
And take to Wing before the Curtain's drawn;
Leaves us here to talk to empty Benches;
You to Whores, and Fools to Orange-Wenches.
This makes me speak, these Grievances o'th'Age,
The Poet's Bane, and Ruin of the Stage,
The Fatal Cause that makes me look so thin;
'T has left me nothing on my Bones but Skin:
My Legs with Pain my Body long has carried,
I Am grown so weak -- some cry -- Look! -- he is married;
As if there was no other Plague, but Wife,
To make a Man a weary of his Life:
We have a greater Curse to pull us down,
In being forced to please a barbarous Town;
Who damn all Wit, but what they call their own.

LOok you, Sister, if you have a Mind we should live civilly together, pray not
a word more of that monstrous filthy thing Marriage, fough


Not of Marriage, Sister? you Jest sure.


Oh for Shame forbear! Can Flesh and Blood hear the Word, and keep within
Bounds? The very sound of it leaves such an impression of filthiness and
obscenity in the Mind, that I have need of all my Morals to silence Nature in
me: Bless me! What refined Soul can bear the impure Consequences of so nauseous
a Thing


Without much Conjuring; when I reflect on Marriage, all I can see in it, is a
dear Husband that will love me, pretty Children that will play about me, and a
House of my own to manage: and, for my part, I cannot perceive what there is in
any of these Things offends Decency, or shocks good Manners


Jesu! That One born with a Spirit, capable of sublime and lofty Things, should
foolishly limit her self to the enjoyment of so mean, and so despicable a
Creature as Man


Believe me, Sister, it is not prudence in frail Woman to Huff and Hector; for
either she yields in time; and then how insultingly does a Man triumph over her
conquered Pride? Or if, to the last, she can boast of the venerable Title of
Virgin, Does not the satirical World ridicule her Wisdom, and mock her
Singularity? Till almost choakt with Vapors, and devoured with Spleen, she
makes in Policy a poor shift to rail at Men that scorn her; and grudging to the
Young the Joys she has outlived, she pines away with Envy, and dies a fretting
Martyr for a reproachful Cause


Poor Soul! how deeply is the Spirit in you immersed in the foul Abyss of your
Senses. Go on pretty Miss, please your self with fond and airy Notions. But
know this, That if there be Fancy in your Choice, there is Judgment in mine. To
Philosophy, and not to Man, do I give the Empire of my self; I scorn to yield
to common Laws, and to make that Reason a Slave to Mankind, which kind Heaven
imparted free to me


This is Heroic indeed: but, pray good Sister, with all your Wit, can you
answer me this Question? What sort of Figure had you made in the World, had
your wise Progenitors always been wrapped up in lofty Speculations, or musing
upon musty Books; had they never condescended to talk familiar Things, and now
and then discoursed plain Nature together? Well, since I cannot be a Wit my
self, I Will try to bring Wits, and to stock the World with little Doctors, that
shall propagate Learning to all Generations


I pity you, poor Sister: But pray, since you are so very fond of that
Ceremonious Piece of Ruin, let us hear at least, who is the worthy Object of
your Inclinations, -- I hope, not Clerimont


Why not Clerimont, pray? Does he want Merit? Is his Estate so mean? or, Is
there any Thing in his Person should make one blush at the Choice


I do not say there is; but you cannot be ignorant that he is mine already by
right of Conquest


Lord, Sister, must then so vast, and so sublime a Genius as yours, limit it
self to the Enjoyment of so mean a Creature as Man


Reason, which is my Guide, and not my Tyrant, does not disapprove of the
Courtship of a Man of Virtue; though I may hate him for a Husband, yet he may
please me well enough, under the Title of an Admirer


Passionate Speeches, Fond Addresses, Platonic Gallantry, and such Toys, may
feed up the Vanity of a Woman: But, Sister, Are you sure Love has nothing more
to desire


Thanks to my Wit, I can answer for One; and I should make a sad Example of the
daring Mortal, that should attempt to rifle the precious Magazine of my
Chastity


But after all, What Assurance have you, that Clerimont is yours?


Surely, after a Thousand Declarations of his Love, I think, Sister, I may rely
upon his Sincerity in spite of Rivals


I do not love to boast; but if you have a mind to try it, here comes one shall
decide the Quarrel. Come on Clerimont, and without any Fear, or Partiality,
disclose your Heart. My Sister challenges your Love, and I flatter my self I
have a right to it; let us see in whose Favor you will declare your self


I am not so fond, Sister, of a public Declaration, as to put any Man I value,
to the hard Extremity, either of Dissembling, or Disobliging: the One is as
unworthy of a Man of Honor, as the other is against the Rules of fine Breeding


No, Madam; my Heart, incapable of Dissembling, does not scruple to own an
Engagement which is the Pride and Happiness of my Life: Fair Mariana's Charms
are such as will easily justify the greatest Passion in the World


But can those mighty Charms, Sir, be a good Excuse for Baseness and Infidelity?


Do me more Justice, Madam; and impute to your self the blame of my
Inconstancy: It Is that stiff and imperious Carriage of yours, that cold
Indifferency you affected upon all Occasions, and your high boasting of the
tyrannical Empire you exercised over me, have at last opened my Eyes, and
restored me to the Use of my Reason; and can you now complain, or --


I Complain? No Sir, you mistake me; my Resentment would make you proud, and
fancy that your Heart was a Conquest worth my keeping


Now, Sister, here is a Scope for your Philosophy with a vengeance: sum up all
your Morals to your Assistance; let us see if you can look upon a happy Rival
with a Stoical and Undaunted Mind


You triumph, Sister, in your pretty Looks, and pleasing Smiles, and think of
Insulting, perhaps too soon; feed your easy, deluded Soul, with empty Dreams
of Pleasure: Your Happiness is not so great, as to deserve my Envy --

-- Nor perhaps so certain yet, as not to leave me some Prospect of a Change.


However she may endeavor to disguise it, I am satisfied, she is not a little
offended at the Sincerity of my Declaration


But I am pleased with it; and without the laborious Task of two years Love you
have bestowed on her in vain, I give you leave to think me not Ungrateful


Still as you speak, my Love discerns fresh Wonders; and to that free and
generous Temper, so opposite to the little Artifices and Dissimulation of your
Sex, do I resign all the Liberty your other Charms have left me


Mistake me not, Clerimont; I set as high a Value upon the Modesty of our Sex,
as the best Moralists of 'em all; but yet I see no reason why we should keep a
Lover at such a distance, when we are once satisfied of his Worth and
Sincerity; since all the Incense after that exacted, serves only to gratify
the two great Idols of our Souls, Pride and Vanity, and gives no real
Satisfaction either to Reason or Reputation


Nay, proves often a piece of Policy very fatal to the Proud and Scornful of
your Sex; for their Vanity forcing thus a pining Lover to spend his whole Stock
of Love in Courtship, the Consequence of it, is, That he has none left for
Marriage


Oh, Madam, I am quite out of breath!


What Is the matter now, Lucy?


The Matter? only Treason, High Treason plotting against you two within.


I dare lay a Wager, your Sister's Jealousy has been at work.


It Is even so; I never saw her Philosophy so ruffl'd before.


But what was the Result of it, Lucy? How did her Wise, her Witty Mother take
it


You know her Way; she has always more Sentences in her Mouth than Teeth.


But still let us hear a little.


With a furious train of her bombast Expressions, and a flood of Latin, which,
for ought I know, was all Swearing or Conjuring, she did just now, in her Tone
of Authority, pronounce, That Mariana, the Undutiful Mariana, should have no
other Husband but Mr. Timothy Witless


Don't you tremble, Clerimont, at the Name of your Rival?


No Rival, Madam, can seem dangerous to me, after your last Assurance.


No; on my Conscience, you need not fear him.


But how came you to know that Property, Mrs. Lucy?


I have seen the Coxcomb at Cambridge: he was noted there for a mighty Boaster
of pretended Favors; and one could hardly name a Woman to him, but he had had
the luck to lie with


A Scholar, on my Word.


Nay, he courted me once most fiercely; but I dreading Matrimony then, a little
more than I do now, sent him packing to his Grammar: Upon this, what does my
mere Scholar do, Sir, to be revenged of me, but use me just as he does his
Books; for as he quotes every day Passages out of 'em, which he never read, so
he boasts of Favors of mine he never enjoyed: never trust me, if I have not a
month's Longing, to serve him a Trick for his Impudence


We'll join with you, Mrs. Lucy, I promise you: But first, Is the Man Easy?
May we venture to play upon him


The Man, Sir, is an exact Tool for our purpose; a good harmless Booby; so very
honest, that as he carried no Wit to Cambridge, so he has the Conscience to
bring none from thence: a dull, lumpish, low-spirited Ninny, who is contented
to be a Fool by Nature, and wants the Skill of our modish Sparks to make
himself a Fool by Art


However, he must be removed; for in Matters of Love, a Fool is as troublesome,
as a Witty Man is dangerous


I Will be content to die a Virgin, if I do not accomplish it for you.


Look to your self, pretty Mrs. Lucy: You could not have bound your self by a
greater Curse


Then judge your selves: -- My Brother Trap, who waits on him at Cambridge, in
the manifold Qualities of Gentleman, Footman, and Valet de Chamber, sent me
word last Week, That his worthy Master was soon to set out for his Matrimonial
Expedition: -- He is famous for merry Tricks and Frollicks; and I dare answer
for his Zeal, or be bound Body for Body, that he will be true to the Cause


I desire no better Security.


This falls out as luckily as we could wish.


I Am informed that he is expected to day; I Will send for him, as soon as I hear
he is come to Town, to Consult with him, and set his Wits at work


Then let us every one to our Tasks immediately: Clerimont, my Uncle Meanwell is
your Friend; you may try his Interest for my Father's Consent


Trust, Madam, to my Love for obeying a Command, on which all my Happiness
depends; I Will about it presently, only give me leave to wait on you within


Pox of the Milk-woman, and my unlucky stumbling on her: she was not Pretty
neither: Fough! how she has daubed me! By the University, my Clothes have dropped
as much of her Stuff, as would suckle ten Parish-Bastards


How the buisie, noisie Rabble began presently to swarm about you! 'Twas a
great mercy, Sir, we came to your Rescue, they would have pulled you a' pieces
else; for that untractable Crew, set up of late for Arbitrary Avengers of
Wrongs, and like greedy Birds of Prey, are always flying to Mischief


I was almost in a Fury, to see a Person of Quality so abused.


Quality! Ay, that I am; and for my Honor let it be spoken, the very First
that ever was of my Family


May I crave your Name, Sir?


My Name, Sir? -- My Father is a Knight, and I would have the rascally Mobb to
know, that he will talk Astrology with 'em for their Ears: By the University,
I Will send a Challenge to the Vermin, and try how much of the Gentleman they
have in their Doublets


Challenge the Mobb? You Jest sure: The Mobb never fight; they only butcher, or
knock one down, without either Method of Fencing, or Rules of Justice


I had an itching Mind to have sent half a dozen of those Sons of Whores to
their pocky Mothers, to make black Bacon of 'em


Faith, I hate Bloodshed, and never was fond of Valor; I had rather live
Three Days in this pretty sinning World, than a Thousand in History


I suppose you come, Sir, to make the Town happy with your Company, for some
time


Truly, Gentlemen, my Business in Town, is the Business of any place I live in;
Love-Intrigues; nothing else: I have of late so liberally Cuckolded the whole
Pody-Politick of Cambridge, Mayor, Aldermen, etc. that I am forced to come up
for the relish of Variety


London is a large Field for Love; you have been here, I don't question, Sir:
Pray, how do you like the City


The City, Sir? Faith, I think the City is well enough; but pox on it, there are
so many Buildings in it, they hinder one from seeing it; would they were pulled
down, we might then have a full Prospect of it


I see, Sir, so honest a Look in your Face, that with an humble Apology for my
Freedom, I must give you a seasonable Caution, and that is, To take heed what
Company you keep in Town; and have a vigilant Eye upon any body that comes near
you; for this great City was never so pestered with Pick-pockets, and busy
Rogues, as it is now


Say you so? Oh, the Villains, let me alone with them; I Will be cunning enough
for 'em, I warrant you


But, Sir, what argues Impudence beyond Example? The officious Cheats will
intrude themselves into your Company, upon the specious pretense of Civility:
They Will make very free and extravagant Offers to you: But, Oh, the wicked Age
we live in! while one of 'em is thus amusing you with some impertinent Story,
the other is very busy in rifling your Pockets


Odd'zookers! give me but a List of the Rogues; my Father is a Justice, and
I Will see 'em hanged, every Mother's Son of 'em


You Will do, Sir, a mighty piece of Service to the Nation: We'll wait on you
with a List of their Names, at a more convenient time; till then, your Servant,
Sir


Gentlemen, Yours -- Look to your self, Trap, as we walk home; for these kind
Gentlemen were pleased to inform me, the Town is full of Cheats and Rogues: --
Would I could catch some of 'em with their Hands in my Pockets, I Would presently
say to my Sword, -- Sword! out of the Scab-board. -- O, I am Robbed! By the
University, Robbed! -- my Sword: -- My Purse! -- Nay, the very Speech for my
Mistress, is gone too! I am Undone! I shall not be Married this Week! Alack!
Alack

I am safe; that is well: Come, Sir, you are gulled, I see; but if the Speech be
the worst of your Loss, I warrant you there is Learning enough upon my
Shoulders to make a new one: Pox of your Books! how heavy they are! -- it is
well for you, you do not load your Memory with 'em: D'Zlife! Could you not,
like the rest of the Scholars, leave your Learning behind you


O sweet, honey Trap, I shall never have so fine a Speech again, there was no
less than three Acts of Parliament quoted in it


But pray now, have you done? Shall we march on? lest your kind Gentlemen
return, and ease me of my Burden


Ay, Trap; Ay; only this by way of Caution; Be sure to send Word immediately to
dear Lucy, Not to take any manner of notice of me, when I come to court her
Mistress: I Will be for her again, tell her, as soon as I have got Mrs. Meanwell,
that sweet Bird of Love, into the Cage of Matrimony; till then, Trap, no
Syllable, pray, of any Night-Adventures


Oh, there you are out, Sir; with Submission, I think it your Interest, the
thing should be known


Fie, Trap, Fie; 'twould spoil my Marriage.


'D'Zlife! quite contrary: Believe me, Sir, a Lover is valued by his Mistress,
as a Soldier by his General, the better for his Experience


But for all your fooling, Trap, if Sir Timothy should examine you about my
Intrigues, don't you be such a Buzzard, as to own, it was upon some ill Design:
Tell him only, That having often heard, that the meeting of two Maiden-heads,
begets commonly a Fool; I thought it prudence in me, to take care, the Son
and Heir of my Family should not be so unlike my self


Oh! If so, then by all means, your future Spouse should use the same Caution;
for then your Children would be wonderful Wise: -- But come, Lead on, pray


Oh, my Speech! 'twas a rare one: --

Oh, my Sword! 'twas a pure Blade. --


This Mrs. Catchat has a great Influence over the Lady Meanwell, her Sister;
and if I can make her our Friend, she will be a good Advocate for us: I Will try --

Suffer, Madam, a passionate Lover to make use of this Opportunity, to discover
to you the sincere --


Hold, Sir, Hold; Not so fast, pray: Don't explain your self too freely yet;
there are Rules of Decency to be observed in every thing


That Is true, Madam: But my Passion is grown to such a height, that --


I know well enough, Sir, that you love me, sigh, and dye for me; yet let me
tell you, it is both prudent, and discreet, I should pretend Ignorance, at least
for a time


Oh, Madam, give me leave but to open my Heart to you, and you will be satisfied,
that my --


Believe me, Clerimont, an easy Conquest affords but little Glory: You shall
value my Heart the better, if I make you pull and tugg hard for it


But still you mistake my Meaning, Madam; I Will explain my self better, and make
you sensible, that what I wish so impatiently for, is only --


What! Would you come to a Conclusion so very quick? Fie, Clerimont, it is
against the Rules. What had become of the rest of the Romance, had Mandana
yielded presently to Grand Cyrus; or, Claelia fled into the Arms of Aronces at
the first Intimation of his Love


Let not your Heart, Madam, be so alarmed; you have no violence to fear from
me: I can assure you, Mariana is the only Object of my Desires; and I want
nothing to complete my Happiness, but Sir Maurice's Consent, with the Favor of
your Assistance toward it


Oh Sir, this Shift I must hugg you for; -- it is the prettiest ever came into a
witty Man's Head. I admire your Invention; and vow in all the Romances I ever
read, I hardly met with any thing more Ingenious, or better contrived


This is Matter of Fact, Madam, and not of Wit: It Is Mariana I love, it is
Mariana has the sole Empire of my Heart, and to obtain her is my highest
Ambition


Ah, good Sir, D'Autres, I understand, well enough, what it is you mean, under
the disguised Name of Mariana. Poor Creature! She is but a Pretense I see; and
indeed, as the case stands, it is well for you, Clerimont, you are not in
Earnest with her; for to my knowledge, she is a Manhater


Ah, Madam! Why must you so deceive your self, as not to believe what is Truth,
and fancy Things that are not


No more Grimaces, as you love me; pull off the Vizard, Clerimont, and be not
ashamed to own a Passion which your Looks cannot conceal


Madam, I protest --


Nay, protest what you will, you shall sigh a little longer: It Is not for the
Credit, and Reputation of my Charms, to take pity of a Man so soon; -- though I
confess, were I to break a Rule, there is so must Honesty in that Physiognomy
of yours, that I could almost be tempted to --


Keep to your Rules, Madam, I entreat you; but do not go on in your Error.


Adieu Clerimont, let this suffice for once; I have, I fear, discovered too
much Weakness already: It Is time for my Modesty to make an honorable Retreat


What, go undeceived! and still running on in that Extravagant Humor, --
Madam, I tell you --


Pray forbear, Sir, and be not so pressing: Surely you don't design to offer
Violence to my Honor


May I perish, Madam, if I have such a Thought.


I Will hear no more, au revoir --


Hang me, Madam, if I love you, your --


I tell you, Sir, it is in vain, -- au revoir --

Pox of her Fancies: I never met with any thing so impertinent in my Life. When
a vain Woman is in Love, she must, for her own Credit, persuade her self she is
beloved

And speaking Truth in Love, we are not believed,
All Women like in this, to be deceived.

I Am overjoyed at the News, Brother; for his Father and I, were intimate
Friends, and fellow Soldiers under Monk. You may assure Clerimont, that I shall
be Proud of the Honor of his Alliance --

But here comes my Sister; let us hear what she says to it. You come in very
good time, Sister, to give your Opinion about a Match for my Daughter.
Clerimont is the Man my Brother proposes: And I am so far satisfied with his
Character, that I give my Consent to it


My Brother Meanwell cannot be in Earnest sure. I know the thing is impossible.


How now, Sister, What do you mean by that?


Nothing Brother, but only that you are imposed, prettily imposed upon; that is
all. The Gentleman's Heart, to my knowledge, is deeply enga'd somewhere else


You are in a merry Humor, Sister: What Is the meaning of this Fooling? Pray,
Is not Clerimont in Love with my Niece


I have Reason to think he is not.


D'Zlife! I have it from his own Mouth, Sister.


Ah, ah, ah, poor Brother! How I pity your Ignorance!


What-a-Pox! Did not he just now desire me to propose the Match to Sir Maurice?
you dote surely


Ah, ah, ah, this Plot will not take, Brother, you must think again.


The Woman is mad with her Laughing. Where Is the Jest of it pray?


No Jest at all, but very good Earnest I assure you Will you have it? here it
is. Clerimont's Love is a Mystery, revealed, as yet, to none but me: But I Will
be so kind, perhaps, as to open your Eyes, that you may see your Error


Ay do: Since you pretend to know things so well, let us hear a little, where it
is his Affections are so deeply engaged


But tell me first, Have you a Curiosity to know it?


Surely, I think it does concern us all to be better informed about it.


Shall I name the very Person?


Ay, ay, by all means; I Am impatient.


Well, since you desire it so earnestly, know Brothers, it is my self.


What you! That Is a very good Jest in troth. Sister, Sister, Do you know no
body in Town to put this upon, but your own Brothers? Ha! ha! ha


Bless me Sirs! What means all this Wonder? You laugh, and stare, just as if I
had said something extraordinary. What do you see in me pray, that is so very
despicable? I am, thank God, so made, as not to need complain of Nature


I vow, Brother, we have been under a sad Mistake all this while; we never knew
before, we had a Beauty in our Family


I know, poor Souls, if you don't, who it is can yet kill with a Frown, and
Fetter with a Smile


I am sorry, Sister, the World is blind.


All the World is not Brother, -- Freeman, Belair, Courtall, Valentin,
Beaugard, Dorimant, Belamour, stand, I think, in spite of Envy, as so many
living Trophies to my conquering Charms


Ha! ha! ha! all these love you, Sister, don't they?


Love me! yes, I think they do; -- and besides these, a great many more, though I
say it. I could once have mustered a whole Regiment of 'em; for besides those,
my Scorns have dispatched, the Wars have robbed me of some, and the rest I have
discarded


But pray once in your Life deal Ingeniously with us. Did ever any of these
Gentlemen tell you, they were really in Love with you


None ever durst take so much Freedom with me.


Freeman, I hear, gives the worst Characters of you, and ridicules you in all
Companies


That Is only to disguise his Passion, and deceive the World the better.


But what is the Reason we never see Courtall here?


It Is to show the greatest Respect.


Valentin, of late, makes violent Love to Florimel.


The Gentleman was forward, and that is the Penance I impose on him for a Month.


But what if he should fall to it in earnest, and bid adieu to your conquering
Charms


I don't fear him, Brother; he values Beauty too much, to forsake me.


Belamour, to my knowledge, is Married to Philinda.


'Twas Despair drove him to it.


Beaugard, I hear, keeps a Miss at Greenwich.


I allow him to acquaint himself with Vice, that he may value my Virtue the
more


As for Dorimant, there is but little Hopes of him: He was always a desperate
Woman-Hater


He was so, Brother, before he saw me: He is not the first Convert my Looks
have made


And as for Belair, you know well enough, Sister, that he professes himself an
inveterate Enemy to stale Virginities


The more Hopes for me then.


OF my Conscience, Sister, these are all Visions.


Nothing but Chimera's of her own.


Ay, Chimera's! Visions! Visions and Chimera's! nothing but Chimera's! Very
well; I am glad of the Chimera's; I did not know before, I had Visions and
Chimera's


OF my Conscience, Women's Heads, now adays, are so stuff't up with their Trash
of Romances and Poetry, that there is no room left in 'em for Reason, or Common
Sense: Our Sister is Mad; stark Mad, Brother


She has got the Trick of Old Maids, poor Creature; she builds Imaginary
Trophies of Love upon the Ruins of her Beauty; and sets as good a Face as she
can upon her Sorrows, whilst inwardly she is a continual Prey to uneasy
Thoughts, and consuming Desires; to knawing Despair, and tearing Remorse: I
pity her with all my heart. -- But to return; I have engaged to give Clerimont
an Answer: Shall he have Mariana, or shall he not


Why do you ask again, Brother? I have consented to it already.


Then let us in, and join your Lady's Consent to yours.


What need of that, pray? Have I not passed my Word to you?


That Is true, Brother; but still 'twou'd not be amiss, I think, before I
deliver my Message, I were sure of her Approbation too; for you know, she is so
--


It Is needless, I tell you; I Will answer for my Wife, and take the thing upon my
self: Go you, and acquaint Clerimont, that he has my free Consent, while I
discourse with Mariana, who comes out seasonably for that purpos


Come hither, Child, I have pretty News to tell you: Do you know one Clerimont?


I have heard of him, Sir.


What Character has he?


The World allows him to be a Man of Wit and Honor.


I am glad your Account agrees with mine; for I have some Thoughts of making
him my Son-in-Law


Oh, ravishing News! Pardon me, dear Sir, if I have done ill, in concealing
from you till now, that this same Clerimont you named, has already shown some
Inclination for me; the return of which, I am glad to find, is by your Consent
approved of


You mistake me, Child; it is for your Sister Lovewit, and not for you, I have
given my Word


Oh, Heavens! what is it I hear?


Is there any thing in this, seems so surprising to you, Child?


Is it possible Clerimont should be so Unfaithful?


What means this great Concern?


Support me, Lucy; I shall Faint.


Come, Child, be not so concerned; this was only to try you, and see if your
Love to Clerimont is as great as the Esteem I have for him: He has my Consent
to make his Addresses to you; use him you as a Lover


I receive the Blessing on my Knees; and thank Heaven, my Duty and Love are
reconciled


I understand my Wife designs you for young Mr. Witless; but he will come too
late I assure him: however, I must receive him civilly, and amuse him for a
while, the better to secure our Projec


Her Ladyship, I Am afraid, will make use of all her Power and Rhetoric to
oppose my Wishes


I Would fain see that.


Ay, well said, Sir: Don't let her great Words frighten you?


A pretty thing, indeed! a Husband should mind what a Wife says.

Sir Timothy Witless, and his lubberly Son, are just come in; and I made half
before 'em, to observe how my Rival receives the first Complements of her new
Lover


Sir Maurice, this is my Son Tim, of whom Fame has told you so much already.


Mr. Witless, your Servant; I can hardly Express how glad I am to see you.


Now Tim. for your Complements.


Is it not expedient, Sir, I should begin with the Father?


Ay, Ay; by all means.

Sir, I come to salute, acknowledge, cherish and reverence in you a second
Father; but a second Father to whom I am more indebted than to my first; the
first Begot me, but you Choose me; I was his by Necessity, but you accept me by
Favor: what I received from him, was but the mere Operation of the Body; but
what I have from you, is the free Emanation of the the Will; and by how much
more the noble Faculties of the Mind exceed the common Endowments of the Body,
by so much more also do I value that honorable Alliance, for which I am now
come to pay you my profound and respectful Homage


Nothing like a College, Madam, for Wit.


Have I performed well, Sir?


To a Miracle, Tim. -- Now for the Ladies.


Must I Kiss?


Ay, Ay, Boy; they expect it:

Madam, your Right of Maternity --


Odds bodikins, Tim. you are out; -- that is not the Mother.


Where is she then? -- It Is none of my fault, sure?


My Wife will be here presently, Mr. Witless.


Shall I stay, Father, till she comes to receive my Speech?


You may in the mean time harangue your Mistress.


There stands a Lady, Sir, waits impatiently for your Complement.

Madam, As the Statue of Memnon gave an harmonious Sound, when the Rays of the
Sun reflected on it; in a like manner do I find my self animated with a
ravishing Transport, at the glorious Appearance of the Sunshine of your
Beauty: -- Give me leave then, Madam, to lay at the Altar of your Charms, the
Offering of that Heart, ambitious only of the Honor of being, Madam, your most
loving and devoted Servant and Husband, Timothy Witless, of Clare-Hall


Hey-day! Who would grudge Studying hard, to say such fine things.


Well, Mr. Witless, What do you think of my Daughter? Is she not a pretty Book
for you to turn over


the Lady is a Beauty in Folio.


Dear, this is Mr. Wittless I present to you.

Wittless to the Lady M. Madam your Right of Maternity. --


I am glad my auspicious Stars, have, by their benign Influence, directed my
Steps to this place, -- that I might --


Madam, your Right of Maternity, -- your Right of Maternity -- because of her
Portion, -- Pretty Sons, and Daughters, I like her very well. -- Humph, --
Madam, you have interrupted me in the middle of my Period, and that has
confounded my Memory


It Is very well, Sir. Daughter, this is the individual Gentlemen, Fate has
decreed, and I pronounce, your Husband


What! dear Duck! before Sir Timothy, and I have examined into Matters?


Duck! fough! What a rustic and mean Expression is there?


Well, then my walking University, my puzling Library of Flesh, give me leave
to tell you, things of this Nature deserves some consideration


That Is good indeed with People that need second Thoughts: But where quick
Imagination, and profound Judgment meet, the first do as well. I have resolved
it shall be so; no more words pray: I expect your compliance


But, Why must we precipitate things in this manner? Why not give 'em time to
know one another? Are you sure their Inclinations will agree


Marriage may breed Love; they must try.


On my word, Lady, if Marriage has that Effect with them, they will have better
Luck than I


For my part, Madam, I Am ready.


Spoke like a Man, Tim.


And for my part, Sir, I am not: I must freely own to you, that your Merit has
not yet made an Impression deep enough in me


There is such a Sympathy of Features in our Two Faces, that my Heart tells me,
we were made one for another


Marriage is so lasting a Bondage, that surely it should be beneath the
Character of a Man of Honor, to wish under it a Person he Loves


Nego Consequentiam, Madam, I may be Man of Honor, and yet consent to receive
you of the Hands of your Parents


A Woman's Heart proves commonly a Rebel, which was taken from her by Violence.


Tim. Tim. fair Means are best.


We read in the Ancients, Madam, that there was a laudable Custom amongst 'em,
to ravish Daughters out of their Father's Houses, to the end it should not
appear, that they had, of their own accord, fled into the Arms of a Man


The Ancients, Sir, are dead, and we live; we can save our Modesty without
their Customs: And when a Match is offered, we know how to express our Liking
to it, without offending against the Rules of Decency. Give me, Sir, but a
little time: If you love me, as you pretend, you must have no other Will but
mine


Yes, Madam, to the Interest of my Love Exclusively.


But sure the greatest Instance of Love, in a Complaisant Lover, is to submit,
without reserve, to the Pleasure of his Mistress


Distinguo, Madam; where the possession of her Person is not concerned,
Concedo; but where it is, Nego. --


Well, Sir, since you want Complaisance to allow me time to consider, I Will not
want Prudence to take it my self. I am not for Marrying in such have, nor
before my Father has declared his Mind, Sir


My Sister you see, Madam, had rather rely upon her Fancy, than trust to better
Eyes for a Choice


Sister, if my Father will not give me the Man I love, I shall beg of him, at
least, not to force me to Marry one I hate


Your Daughter, Sir Maurice, grows every Day so Giddy, and so exorbitantly
Rude, that no polite Soul can bear with her Effrontery: but I Will take her to
Task, and teach her a Se connoitre. --


Make room, make room for the Virgil of our Age.


What! my old Lover, Sir Maggot Jingle, I am in an Ecstasy for Joy.


Pox of their Jingle, and his scandalous Title: Must that starving parasitical
Knight be always rhiming and bawling at my Table. Curse on him! One may know by
his Visits, better than by the Clock, when it is Dinnertime at my House. -- Sir
Timothy, I think you and I have nothing to do here, Had not we best go in, and
take a Pipe in my little Room


With all my Heart, Sir Maurice.


The Ladies will take care of Mr. Witless.


Mr. Witless, let me have the Honor of presenting you to this Darling of the
Muses, this younger Brother of Apollo, Sir Maggot Jingle


What, Madam, the Famous Sir Maggot Jingle that writ that Incomparable Poem of
the Fox


The very same, Sir.


Oh Sir! for the sake of the Fox, let me embrace you, as long as there are Men
that love to hunt after Wit and Fancy; your Fox will be sure to be run to
Posterity


Sir your most Humble: I do not love to commend my self; but I take that Piece
to be a Non ultra in the kind


What pity it is, Sir, the Court does not understand your Merit.


I am now favoring the ungrateful World, with a rare Collection of my Songs;
for without Vanity let it be spoken, I am the best Lyrick Poet in England


How Wittily his Muse expresses her self.


I Am now in my Element -- Nimble bring Chairs. -- There lies a Booby now, for
want of understanding the Aequilibrium of Things


And so this, I saw it, as soon as I was down.


It Is well for you, Son of an Ass,
Nature did not make you of Glass.

What! an impromptu with so much Wit! Wonderful!


Surely this Man is the Phoenix of Poetry.


Well Ladies, Is the Day fixed for the opening of your Academy of Beaux Esprits.


Tuesday is the Day, Sir Maggot.


Woe then to the Royal Society; the Glory of it will suffer a manifest Eclipse.


Nay, Sir Maggot, we will not be so Cruel neither to those Gentlemen as to
refuse to join to our Learned Body, the most able Mathematicians amongst 'em;
to the end, that by a free Communication of our Discoveries, we may penetrate
together into such dark Secrets of Nature, as have hitherto been deemed
unfathomable by humane Capacity


Our Society shall be as the Inquisition, a Tribunal without Appeal, or Mercy;
where, with a Sovereign Authority, we shall Judge of all Books that come out:
No Authors shall write well, but those we approve of; and no body pretend to
Wit, but we, and our Friends


But you, Sir Maggot, has your witty Muse conceived of late: What News pray rom
Apollo's Levce


Very little, Madam, that deserves to be named to such Sappho's of our Age, as
I see here


Come Sir Maggot, no Compliments: You know we had rather hear fine things, than
our selves commended


This is another impromptu, Ladies only made at leisure.


Oh! I shall fall into a Swoon. --


Hum, Hum, Hum. --


To the Countess of Squeezingham, upon her AGUE.

Your Prudence surely, is asleep,
Whilst you magnificently treat;
And in your rich Apartment keep
Your cruel Enemy in state.
Oh the Jantee Beginning.


What a gallant Turn is there!


Nothing can be more degage.


Ah force it out, say what they will,
From your Apartment, rich and rare;
The Ungrateful that attempts to kill,
And rob you of a Life so fair.

Oh give me leave to breath,


I am all Rapture, I vow. --


Bless me! what a pretty Metaphor that rich Apartment is.


The Parenthesis, in my mind, is worth a Million. -- Force it out, say what
they will, it implies a Challenge, a Defiance to Critics


I Would freely give my Portion to be the Author of a Thing, so much out of the
common Road


What follows, Ladies, will not disgrace the beginning I Am sure.

What! thus regardless of your Race,
In your high Blood it self to place!
And Night and Day torment you so.
Though it has all this Favor found,
Oh, yet at length some Anger show;
And when next to the Bath you go,
With your own Hands let it be drowned.

I can hold no longer.


I die away! Support me! Oh, Support me, some body! Alas! Alas!


I Am lost in Pleasure!


Though it has all this Favor found; though you have indulged it, humored it
so long --


Oh, yet at length some Anger show; some Passion, some Indignation, some
Resentment for its Ingratitude


With your own Hands let it be drowned: -- That is, Take hold of it, Madam, and
plunge it into the Water -- Oh! Oh! --


Well, Mr. Witless, did you ever hear the like! What do you think now the
Author of so excellent a Piece deserves


What he deserves, Madam? -- He deserves to be Hanged.


What, Sir, do you know him?


Not I, Sir, by Jupiter Ammon; but I warrant him, a most illiterate Ais; a mere
Rhiming Idiot, without the least Tincture of Philosophy in him


You are too severe, Mr. Witless; the Author is a Man noted for Wit among us.


That Is all one to me; I maintain him Guilty of High Treason against Aristotle:
Who in the Devil's Name, ever heard of an Ague being a Tangible Body, and
subject to Drowning


I am confident, Sir, no Man can write better Verses than these; and my reason
for it, is, because I am my self the Author of 'em


What you, Sir?


Yes, Sir; my self in Person.


The more shame for you, Sir. -- Look you Ladies, I Will make you a Copy of
Verses upon any Subject you will name, only to let you see the difference between
a Poet and a Scholar


Then write a Madrigal upon a Box of the Ear.


Meaning me, Sir? --


Sir Maggotty Jingle
Did make my Ear tingle;
Which was to me an Affront:
But strait for his Box
I wished him the Pox;
So had the better on it.
Ha! Ha! Ha!


What? do you Laugh? you Chimney-Sweeper of Parnassus! -- Though I take a Box
of the Ear; I have too much Honor to put up a Jeer: By the Scull of Chaucer,
I Will Rhyme thee Black and Blue. -- Come if you dare! you Poet Laureat of Bedlam


In the Name of Apollo, I charge you to keep the Peace.


Thank the Lady, Mushroom, that you live. -- And now Ladies, to convince you,
that a sneaking Rhiming Knight, is but an Owl to a Scholar, Here, Here Is a
piece of Work, for One that has been at Cambridge but Fours Years and
Three-quarters


If you please, Madam, I Will save your Ladyship the trouble of Reading. Sir. M.
takes the Paper

And Exact and Accurate MAP, containing the most Curious and most Remarkable
Signs upon the Road between Cambridge and London, with their several Motto's,
Inscriptions and Devices, as they were faithfully taken and delineated by
Timothy Witless, Bachelor of Arts, in his late Travels


By Apollo, the thing is new and singular -- Hah! Hah! Hah!


You may look, Ladies, and wonder: I can say, that for my self, there is a
thing now, Sir Francis Drake neverthought of in all his Travels at Sea


For my part, I am charmed with the curious Drawing.


And well you may, Lady: for to tell you the truth, I have, in all my Fancies,
a huge stroke of the Ancients: -- Look you; All these fine Prospects you see
here, I have copied from a famous Landscape, drawn, to the best of my Memory,
five Years before the Flood


Pray, Sir, do you know what Countryman the Painter was.


A Foreigner, to be sure, by his way of Drawing: I think he was Painter in
Ordinary to the King of Venice; his Name begins with an (etc.) but truly, I
have forgot it now


Madam -- Dinner is upon the Table.


Mr. Witless, you will do us the favor to go in.


Sir Maggot, for the sake of the Ague, be you my Guest to day.


Agreed: --


A hearty Meal must make our Works complete;
A Poet lives to Write, and Writes to Eat.
HIS Steward's Place, say thou? Faith, no News in the World could have been
more welcome; for besides that I have a natural Inclination to Mischief, Sir
Timothy was pleased, just now, to give me warning to be gone to morrow, only
for being at my arrival a little too familiar with that habitual Sin of his,
Mrs Heart-ease, his Housekeeper, and I was almost mad for an opportunity to be
revenged of him


Hold, Jack, Hold; here comes the Gentleman; make your best Honors to your
best Master. --


He does not look as if he were a Man of Scruples: I dare answer (...) his
Physiognomy, That his Conscience can dispense with a little Rogu^ (...) do a
Man a Kindness: But has he the heart to serve his Master's Riva^ (...


For a Master, Sir, give me leave to own none but you: (...) Conscience, I am
as modish as the Vicar of Brey; and seldom listen (...) there is Preferment in
the case


Then let us to Action immediately: What can you think (...) to give me a taste
of your Wit


For my Probation Trick, I have a Plot in hand, will strangely confound and
perplex the Witlesses: but I must not forestall you with an Account of my
Projects; only by way of Prologue to our Comedy, if you have a mind to make
your self Sport, and serve your Love at the same time, I can put you in a way


With all my heart: -- Let Us hear what you propose?


Mr. Witless has ordered me to find out a Dancing Master for him: Let me but
introduce you in that Quality, and you will have a good Opportunity to remove his
Affections from your Mistress: the Man is as Easy as you can to wish; put any
thing upon him, I Will answer, 'twill take


I long to be acting of that part; for I was impatient to see the Figure of the
Man


Then march about instantly; for behold the Enemy appears.


Adieu, pretty Mrs. Lucy: Remember me a thousand times to Charming Mariana, --
You Matchiavel, away to Consultation


I say, Mr. Witless, that Milk-Sop Babe, my Niece, shall not have on; upon my
Word, she shall not


She used me scurvily, that is the truth on it.


She does not deserve a Man of Wit.


No more she don't, Faith.


I am really so shagreen, Sir, to see a pretty Gentleman abused in my Brother's
House, that to save the Credit of his Family, I am thinking of something to
make you amends for his Daughter's Rudeness


You are exceeding Bounteous, Mrs. Catchat.


Look upon me, Mr. Witless, and tell me freely, Could you love a Woman that
has lived just long enough to be Wise, and make a good Choice


It Is such a one I long for, I protest.


A Beautiful, Charming Creature.


Faith, you make my Mouth water.


A Wit, a Critic, an Author?


Odd'zookers! But where shall we find such a Treasure?


Such a Treasure is above the Merit and Ambition of Crowned Heads; and yet at
your Service, Mr. Witless


Oh, you ravish me, Madam! I Am transported! Let me see that Angel! that
Goddess! I must adore her! Where is she? Where is she, pray


Not far, Mr. Witless: -- Here she stands.


Where, Madam? Where?


Turn this way, Mr. Witless, and fix your Eyes upon me; -- it is my self.


What! You, Mrs. Catchat! -- And is that Face you have on now, all the Faces
you have in the World, pray


No doubt on, Sir: And surely, whoever has such a One, need not desire a better.


Faith, Madam, to be plain then, that Face of yours is a very unmannerly Face,
to give the Lie to so fair a Description


I cannot be angry with One I Am sure loves me: -- Besides, I must tell you, Mr.
Witless, (though indeed there is little need of any other Charm but my Person,)
I am a Fortune, Sir; -- I have Thousands, Thousands, Sir


Oddzniggs Madam, you should have mentioned that first of all.


The Mortal I shall bless with the possession of my Personal Goods, extrinsick,
or intrinsic, shall have 4000 l. down, and a 1000 l. when I am first delivered
of a Child


With Submission, that is ill ordered, Mrs. Catchat, it should be a 1000 l.
down, and 4000 l. at the fall of the First-Fruit; because the Temptation of the
Money, is all the Provocation a Husband is like to have with you, to strive for
an Heir


Bless me! the Fellow is a Fool, a perfect Stranger to Wit, and Beauty: I must
stick to my Clerimont; he is a Man of Judgment


Come, Sir Maggot, we will not be put off with a Complement; we'll have the
Song


To tell you the Truth, I am a little proud of this Piece; look upon it as a
very lucky Hitt of my Muse toward Preferment. -- Here it is. --


SHould King Lewis, with all his might,
Thus say to me, by chance,
Resign thy Peggy for one Night,
And I Will make thee a Peer of France.
To the Monsieur, I Would reply,
As I love a Christmas-Pye,
Her Flesh thy Royal Paw shall not handle.
Keep thy Honor and thy Pelf,
And I Will keep Peggy to my self,
Who shines as bright as any Candle.


Next time Sir Maggot favors us with a Visit, I hope our Meetings will be
regularly fixed


Do you know, Sir Maggot, that I discovered last Week, Three Men in the Moon,
fighting a Duel in a Churchyard


Ay, that I know; and I hear since, that he in the Blue Coat was wounded, and
dropped down into a Tub of Yeast, at a Brewer's in Bury


I saw the poor Creature fall; and I could not but admire at the other Two,
who, instead of running away, and making their Escape, fell a gazing on me for
an Hour together. The Sparks of that shining World, are of a loving
Constitution, I promise you; a few Looks of mine would soon consume 'em all;
and then my Charms, like Alexander, must weep for want of Worlds to Conquer


I cannot boast of prodigious things, Madam: However, I have now a small piece
in the Press, will, I hope, appear new to the World; and that is Cook upon
Littleton turned into Heroic Verse


Now you talk of Projects, Do you know, Ladies, that my Tutor and I, are
setting up a Penny-Post to the West Indies


But you, Mrs. Catchat, what is become pray of your dainty Piece of Work as you
call it.


What! my Satyr against Eunuchs? Fough! I left it unfinished; the filthy
Subject provoked my Spleen, but could not raise my Fancy


For my part, I love any thing that has a relish of the public Spirit in it: I
was yesterday with my Lord Mayor, to communicate to him a Mathematical Engine of
my own, to keep the Streets as clean, and as dry as a drawing Room all the Year
round


How Is this, Madam, pray?


It Is only by securing the City from Rain.


From Rain, Madam! that is impossible. How can you compass it?


Oh easily enough, Mr. VVittless: Tell me, Have you seen the glaring Lamps upon
the Road to Kensington


Yes, Madam, that I have, What then?


Well, just so, it is only setting up Timber Posts round about the City, and
then fixing a pair of Bellows upon every one of 'em, to blow the Clouds away


Sir Maggot, I have now a huge Limbeck making; guess for what.


Guess say you? -- Faith I cannot, unless it be to dissolve the Philosophers
Stone


No, no, Sir Maggot; it is for a more noble Design, I assure you: You must
understand, that I have made an exact Collection of all the Plays that ever
came out, which I design to put into my Limbeck; and then extract all the
Quintessence of. Wit that is in them, to sell it by drops to the Poets of this
Age


Oh Madam, Let me bespeak a few of your witty Drops for the Poor Gentlemen of
the Athenian Mercury


Surely those Oracles of Learning do not want 'em.


Faith but they do: Look you, I proposed but this to them the other Day: Suppose
we should put the Brains of a Scholar into the Head of a Bull, whether or no
that Bull would speak Latin as I do? and never trust me if they knew what to
say to it


But why should you think that so mighty a Miracle. I my self who seldom boast
of any thing, am now teaching a Flea to sing: The little Creature understands
the Notes already; and if I live, she shall sing a Song in the next Opera
that is acted. --


You might have taken the other Bottle sure; Why in such have Sir Timothy?


Look you, Neighbor, when I have Business of Importance in my Noddle, I love
to be Sober: Where is honest Tim? Come my Boy, you must be marrried to morrow,
along along to my Tailor; by the Beard of King Dick, I Will make thee as gay as a
Pageant at my Lord Mayor's Show. Ladies your Servant; Sir Maurice your most
Humble. On, on Boy


I go, Ladies, and remain your most obsequious Slave. My future Progenitor in
Law, I rest for ever your dutiful Son, that is to be


I must take my leave too, Ladies; for some Vertuosi are to wait on me this
Afternoon, about a Scheme I am preparing for the House, to have all the Cities,
Towns, and Villages of England, turned into Seaports


Then Sir Maggot your Servant; but pray remember your Promise, and fail not at
the New Play to morrow; for the Author came Yesterday to pay his devoirs to us,
and we have engaged for our selves, and our Friends, to find it a good one, in
spite of Rules, and Critics


But tell me first, Madam, is the Poet a modest, civil Poet; or is he like one
of those, that cannot be VVitty without being Obscene


What makes you ask Sir Maggot?


It Is only for the pleasure of observing some nice Ladies of my Acquaintance,
who will be sure never to miss the first Acting of a Play, that if there be any
thing high seasoned in it, they may please their Palates, and tickle their
Fancies with it; and then with a turning up of the Nose, and a Jesu had I known
the Play was so filthy, I would not have seen it for a Million: They Will be
sure, for their own Reputation, to cry, the Poet's down; and declaim high
against those who show so little Modesty, as to see it the second Day


I know the Author, Sir Maggot, and dare engage for the Chastity of his Muse.


It Is enough, Ladies, that the Poet is under your Protection; I Will be at his
Play I warrant you, and clap stoutly as soon as the Candles begin to light


I thought, Wit Paramount, I must have been forced to dismiss my self without
Audience


What! Angry? Sir Maurice; I thought you stood all the while admiring the
Famous Sir Maggot Jingle


Hang him for a scurvy Pimp of Wit, that could never Match Rhyme, and Sense
together, a Scoundrel of Parnassus, and the very scandal of his Trade


His Trade! Fough, how Citizen-like is that Expression!


A dull Gossiping, Rhiming Parasite, who Robs the Piazzas of Paper to Write his
Madrigals upon, and stands Recorded in Alehouses, for the inspiring Liquor
that makes him a Wit


Brother, Brother talk with more Reverence of Sir Maggot Jingle, pray, what if
his Loyalty to Oliver has made him Poor, he is still a Knight, and a Poet, and
such as he, you know, can Fight, and Lampoon


Faith, Sister, I fear neither his Sword nor his Satyr, as long as I keep a
good Table; for such as he I know, had rather put up an Affront than lose a
Meal


How now, Sir Maurice, is the merry God Dancing a Jigg within the enclosure of
your Brains? you forget your self strangely methinks


It Is to you, Sister, I speak, what a Devil have you to do with Jingling and
Poetry


Lord, Sister, what a strange compound your Husband is of Vulgar and Clownish
Atoms


A pretty thing indeed, to see those long Spectacles of yours, set on the Top
of my House, for you to peep, and tell how many Hackney Coaches are going in
the Moon


Oh the Illiterate Brute! thus to affront a Telescope.


I am no Scholar, not I, and I thank my Stars for it, but with your leave, so
much common Sense has taught me, that all the Study and Philosophy of a Wife,
should be to please her Husband, instruct her Children, have a Vigilant Eye
over Domestic Affairs, keep a good Order in her Family, and stand as a Living
Pattern of Virtue, and Discretion to all about her


Sir Maurice like another Solon, is now setting up for a Lawgiver, Poor Soul!


The Women of Old did not read so much, but lived better, Housewifry was all
the Knowledge they aspired to; now adays Wives must Write forsooth, and pretend
to Wit with a Pox


It Is the partial, and foolish Opinion of Men Brother, and not our Fault has
made it ridiculous now adays; for a Woman to pretend to Wit, she was born to
it, and can show it well enough, when occasion serves


Ay, to our Cost sometimes, Female Wit Triumphs, and Excels in three things,
Revenge, Dissembling and Cuckoldom; there I grant we must yield to you for
quickness and dexterity


But for all your Jesting Brother, a Man's Wit is as dull as his Appetite, if
not set an Edge by ours


Hang your Edging, a Woman's Wit was always a Pimp to her Pleasures.


I Am tired Sir Maurice with your Nonsense: Satyr does not become a Citizen.


But I tell you Lady, that I will have a Reformation in my House, that this
Plague of Wit has infected all my Servants, even my little Boy, forsooth,
cannot turn the Spit now without a Pharamond, or a Cassandra in his hand; if I
call for Drink, the Butler brings me a Spencer, or a Ben Johnson


If this be all you have to say Sir Maurice; Farewell.


No, Angry Mother of the Muses, give me but Attention, and you shall hear; your
Daughters Wit it seems is like to starve her Love: I Am told she designs to keep
Hospitality in another World, and Feast the worms with her Maidenhead


What strange Jargon's this?


But Mariana being not altogether so Witty, but like a simple Creature,
desirous to keep House in this World; it is time to think of a Husband for her


It Is what my preventing Wisdom has already determined; I have engaged to Sir
Timoth, that his Son shall be the Man; he is a Person of deep parts, and that is
in my Opinion the only way to infuse the Spirit of Improvement into your
Daughter


Did you not perceive by my Daughters Discourse with Mr. Witless, that she has
no great liking to him; why should we force her Inclination my Dear


What now? will you offer to Contradict me; I have past my word, and it must be
so


I am not so much against it my dearest Dear, but only let us do things as they
should be done; let us give her a little time at least, to Conquer her Aversion


It Is pity indeed, but my Determinations should wait for the settling of the
giddy Thoughts of such an illiterate Creature as your Daughter; I am resolved
it shall be as I please, bid her be ready, for to morrow I Will send to Mr.
Engross to bring the Writings this Evening to Seal


But my Dear in a Case of this importance.


What, again? Hold your Tongue Sir Maurcie, I don't love people should reply.


I see your Lady going Brother, I suppose you have had some Discourse about the
business


Yes, Brother.


Well, and what is the Result of it pray, shall we have Mariana? Has she given
her consent, is the thing agreed on


Not altogether.


Does she deny?


No.


Is the matter left in suspense?


Not at all.


What then Brother, is it a Mystery never to be Revealed?


I Will tell you Brother, she says that she has engaged her word for Mr. Witless,
and cannot recall it


And what did you say to it pray, did you accept of him?


I! No; God forbid.


What Answer then did you make?


None at all, and I am glad I did not, for fear she should have disputed me
into a consent


The Reason is admirable Brother; but did you at least propose Clerimont to her?


No Brother, I had more Wit I assure you; look you, when I heard her Name Mr.
Witless, I thought my mentioning Clerimont would but Exasperate her the more


Your Prudence Brother amazes me, an't you ashamed of your soft, and easy
temper


Brother I love Peace, and my Wife is a terrible Dragon when once out of
Humout; she makes indeed a High Boast of her Philosophy, but she is not a bit
the less Choleric for it, and her Morals that teach her to look upon all
things with an indifferent Eye, have not the least Influence upon her Passions;
she is still Woman all over Brother


This is Mockery, perfect Mockery Brother, your Wife Rules because you are
faint hearted; take my word it is the way of Cunning, and designing Wives as
soon as they are Married, Nicely to study the Temper of their Husbands, and
thence Usurp Power in proportion to their weakness


In sober sadness I Am to blame, my Neighbors take Notice of it I hear, and I
begin to be weary on it. Faith I do Brother


For shame, good Brother do not make your self such a Ninny, as to suffer that
puny thing woman to lead you by the Nose; pluck up a Spirit, show your self a
Man; and when your wife has the ill manners to Argue with you, tell her in a
Tone of Authority such is my Will and Pleasure


You are in the right Brother, [Cocking his Hat] come I Am resolved I Will show
more Courage for the future


Well said.


It Is a disgrace for a Man to submit to the Capricious Humor of a wife.


Very well.


She has abused my Patience too long.


Very true.


Too much imposed upon me.


That Is certain.


And she shall know to day, that my Daughter is my Daughter, and that it
belongs to me, and to no body else, to dispose of her as I please


Now it is as it should be, I am overjoyed at the change.


You Know Clerimont's Lodgings, pray call upon him, and tell him, I must speak
with him instantly


I am going to the Exchange, to hear what News from Hamburgh, for I had notice
this morning that our Ship is safely arrived, and I Will see him as I go


HEre he comes, compose your self a little, and forbear Laughing if you can --
Sir, here is Mr. Le Brall,


Sir, your very profound, humble Servant.


Your man informs me, Sir, that you have a desire to learn the graceful motions
of our Art, I shall be proud of --


But first tell me, Sir, could I learn to Dance by Grammar? I love to do things
methodically


That cannot be, Sir; for the Perfection, or End of our Art is chiefly to reform
the rude, and clownish Gestures of the Body, which is a thing merely practical


Whether you know it or no, I can tell you, Sir, your Art is very ancient, I
have read somewhere in Juvenal, that there was a Ball in Noah's Ark


Oh, Sir, that is but a Trifle, we derive the Pedigree of Dancing much higher.


But now let us see what we have to do, I am soon to marry, and I have sent for
you, Mr. Le Brall, to teach me to Dance as curiously as you can, for 'twould be
a shame for a Gentleman, and a Scholar as I am, that any body should outdo me
at my own Wedding


Don't you question, Sir, but I shall come off with credit; but pray when is
the day


To night, I hope.


What! so soon, Sir! you confound me.


Don't let that fright you, Mr. Le Brall, my Master is not like other People,
his Brains circulate to his very Heels; I Will engage for him, that he will learn
as much in two hours, as he would do in a quarter of a year


Oh, if so, we are well enough -- Come, Sir, your Hat -- So: -- Your Shoulders
-- Very well: -- Your Arms -- To a marvel: -- Hold up your Head -- So: -- Your
right Foot forward -- So: -- Turn out your Toes -- So: -- Keep your Body
straight -- Admirable: -- Make your Honors -- Nothing can be more exact


Well, what do you think on it, Master? I fancy I do pretty well.


You amaze me, Sir, with your Dexterity.


Don't you think my Mistress will be transported to see me dance so well? You
must be at the Wedding, Master, remember I invite you


He Will be there I don't question, and one of the chief Actors, I hope.


You honor me, Sir; but will you pardon my Curiosity, if I presume to ask the
Lady's Name who is to be so happy


My Mistress, and future Spouse, Sir, is one Mrs. Meanwell.


Which of 'em -- Mariana?


The very same.


If so, then I must needs say, some People have better Luck than they deserve.


What can be the meaning of this?


Nothing, nothing, Sir, I have been too rash I see.


Surely there is something of mystery in this; pray, good Mr. Le Brall, inform
me


No, Sir, men of my Profession ought to be secret.


'Dzlife, I can bear no longer! pray, good Master, do not keep me thus in
suspense; I swear by the University, your Kindness to me shall do you no
disservice


Upon your word, Sir?


Upon my Word and Honor.


Look you, Sir, Sir Maurice is my Friend, Mrs. Meanwell too is one I value; but
surely when a Person of your Character is going to be grossly cheated even by
those he least suspects, I cannot, I must not be silent, I Will deal frankly with
you, Sir, Do you in the business as you think fit


Oh sweet Mr. Le Brall, how good you are!


The young Lady, Sir, to my knowledge has an intimate Engagement with a certain
Spark, that would make nothing of cutting your Throat, should he by chance
discover, that you are resolved to go on in your Amor; she loves him so
passionately too, that I heard her once vow to him, she will have none but him
for a Husband


Say you so? The poor Fool! how I pity her! I have done with her, I warrant
her: What, did the silly Creature fancy a Man of my Exploits and Fame can want
Women? Bless me! the World to me is like the Seraglio to the Grand Signior


Besides, I must tell you by the by, that her Humor is too French, and Airy,
for a man of your solid Parts; who knows, but that it may in time degenerate
into Coqueterie


A word to the Wise, I understand you, Master; the Spark shall not out my Throat I
warrant him, nor the Jipsey make a Cuckold of me I promise her; a Coquet,
'Dzniggers! Let who will take her, the cheating Devil made this morning as if
she had been a very reserved Saint


Woman, Sir, is a Riddle, a mere Compound of Contradictions, whose meaning
you will never find out, but by mistaking her words


Bless me, Sir, there was a narrow Escape for us now, thank your Stars and M.
Le Brall for it


Oh the subtle Crocodile! how I hate her! Nay, she is Illiterate too, and
understands neither Greek nor Latin


Nay, I fancy she despises Dancing too, for I have often observed her making
Faces at her Sister when I was teaching her


Then you go to Sir Maurice's sometimes, Master?


Ay, that I do three times a week.


Oh! what would I give you were there within this hour! for I Am resolved to go,
and give a parting Lecture to that false, cunning, jilting, profligate Minx


I Will endeavor to be there; but pray not a word from whence you had it, you would
ruin me


Upon the word of a Bachelor of Arts, not a tittle; be there only, and I Will
make you Sport I warrant you for this Kindness, I Will so rattle the little Jade
before you --


On my Conscience this is a wicked World; there is no Faith in a Woman, who
cheats even with her modesty


Mr. Le Brall, remember within an hour -- Oh the Devil!


Oh the Woman!


Fortune, her Blindness, does too plainly show,
When on an Ass she would her Gifts bestow;
For though she still desires, not to forsake him,
A Fool's but what a Man of sense will make him: etc.

PRay, good Aunt, what makes you so very earnest to know, if that Clerimont be
quite out of my mind


Kindness to you, Child, nothing else; I know he is Engaged somewhere else, and
I would not have you love in vain


But still what makes you fancy it so very difficult a thing for me to hate
that man? Have my Words or Looks at any time betrayed such a mighty Passion for
him


He boasted of it once; how far he had reason to do it, you know best.


Presumptuous! And could you that know me, Aunt, believe I should make choice
of one, who counts it a scandal in our Sex to pretend to Wit


No, dear Niece, I could hardly imagine you would think that man worthy of your
Esteem, who takes all occasions to Ridicule the excellent Talents the World
admires in you


Unmannerly! he spares no body; I hear even your self, Aunt, don't escape his
Satyr


Stupid! Whatever Approbation your Poetry meets with among the Wits, he is
always the last to commend it


Ignorant! I have twenty times read things of your Composing to him, which he
could not forbear calling Stuff and Nonsense to my Face


Impertinent! I have had a thousand Quarrels with him upon your account.


All this, and more perhaps, I could have dispensed with, but one thing my
Philosophy could not forgive him, that he had hardly loved me two Years before
he began to talk of Marriage -- Fough


Oh the filthy Beast! Fough! it turns my Stomach I protest.


Lord! what a bold and impudent Creature is man, to dare mention the word
Marriage to a Woman of Wit and Fortune? For it is no more than with fawning
Words, and passionate Speeches, to desire her very civilly to mend his
condition, and make her self his Slave


Faith, Niece, it is even so.

For the soft Joys of Love no longer last,
When once the fatal Yea our Lips has past;
Then we begin to court, and to comply,
And find we only Rule, while we Deny.

Out upon those Treacherous Sirens, cruel and bewitching Monsters, who charm us
into Ruin, and greedily devour our Substance


But what say you to this, Niece? I know men in Town, who were born with the
best Dispositions in the World to make good Husbands, who yet as soon as they
came to be married, lest they should be laughed at for their Singularity,
affected a Peevishness, which was not natural to them; and rather than their
Wives should have the Pleasure or Benefit of their good Humor, force
themselves into a sullen Temper; they are true Friends, and merry Companions
abroad, but very ill Husbands at home, and make it their business to appear
Good to every body, but their own Wives


And must I Caress such an Owl? Must I humor such a Fop in every thing? Must I
obey a Fool, who cannot command his Passions, and thinks a Wife was given him
as the Brutes of the Creation, only to serve him? No, help me Reason, and
neither Clerimont, nor any man living, shall ever boast of my Ruin


Why so angry, Madam? What! a Philosopher, and passionate?


Were I as angry as you pretend, Sir I could perhaps find Reasons to justify
my Resentment; a Heart unfaithful and inconstant, is a Monster in Love, as well
as Morality


Can you call that Infidelity, Madam, which was occasioned by your Slights?
It Is true, the Sacrifice you disdained, I have since offered to another, but
still it is not I forsook you, it is you dismissed me


If I deferred to Crown your Wishes, 'twas only because you were not
indifferent to me; I hoped Time would have improved your Love to the Purity and
Perfection of mine, but your Thoughts, I find, cannot keep themselves free from
the filthy Commerce of the Flesh, nor your Soul relish the ravishing Pleasure
of the Union of two Hearts, when the Body, that nauseous, nasty Thing, does not
come in for a Share


It is my misfortune, Madam, to be sensible that I have a Body as well as a
Soul; your refined Love is a piece of Philosophy too high for me to comprehend,
and my Senses stick a little too close to me, to leave it in my power to shake
'em off


Oh! what a strange sort of Love you men are for! Surely 'twas designed for
Brutes only, Creatures inspired by a Soul Divine should, methinks, raise
themselves higher, and not suffer the sweet and fruitful Imagination of
Pleasure to be filthily drowned in an impure and beastly Enjoyment


Platonic Love, Madam, does not agree with my Constitution; my Body is a
Rebel, and will not always keep subject under the Empire of the Mind, I cannot
help it


Well then, since there is no other way, since your brutish Sentiments must
carry it against the Purity of my Reasons, since none but Carnal Fetters will
bind you, endeavor to get my Mother's Consent, I Will try if I can prevail with
my Philosophy


No, Madam, it is now too late had this kind Intention of yours --


I told you as much, dear Niece, but you would not believe me.


My Heart, Madam, is no more in my power.


I know that well enough.


If your Heart, Sir, is not in your power, mine is, and I had rather pierce it,
than throw it away on one, who does not understand the value of it


Poor Niece! she might have saved her self all this fretting -- I pity the
Child with all my Heart -- -- Come, Clerimont, the time of Ceremony is now
over, you may speak more freely, I give you leave


Speak, Madam! I have nothing to say, but only, that I must take my leave of
you, I have a little business with Sir Maurice within


I see you are an exact Lover, afraid of breaking any of your Mistress's
Commands: It Is true, I forbid you this Morning to Express your self too
passionately, but your Modesty Conquers me: Speak your Heart; do, I will not be
Angry


I vow, Madam, all your words are riddles to me.


Nay Clerimont, can you think me stupid to that degree, as not to discern your
Passion for me; believe me, there can be no shame in Adoring such Beauty as
mine: you are not the first by a thousand has counted it an Honor to die for
this Face


Why all this Fustian to me, Madam? I am neither blind, nor ready to be begged
for a Fool


I see you are a bashful Lover; and to give you the greatest Instance of my
Condescension that ever Mortal boasted of, I will save you the Ceremony of a
Declaration, and take it for granted, that you die for me; is it not so,
Clerimont


I protest, Madam, I know nothing of it -- How shall I get rid of this Devil?

Well, Madam, since nothing else will satisfy you, and a Declaration you must
have, give me but time till to morrow, and I Will desire no more


This is Formality, I Am sure, mere Formality, nothing else. I know he must come
to it at last, whether he will or no -- But come, so far I must gratify a
Lover

Adieu, Clerimont; dear Clerimont, adieu till to morrow; I mean, if you can
live till then


Surely angry Heaven could not have plagued Mankind with a greater Curse, than
these fawning, greedy, preying Catchats of our Age, fond, and Libidinous
Monsters, who, Proud when young, turn Wanton in their declining; and Nature now
revenging her self upon 'em, they are at last devoured by that Fire they
refused to quench before. But I must in, lest the Fool comes, and surprises me
before I have seen my Angel


O charming Mariana! you are as welcome to me, as the Sun to a Traveller after a
Storm; I have been set upon by two loving, persecuting Devils, who, without any
mercy, would have robbed you of my Heart, but I Will defend it for you, as long
as it affords me Life to do it


I trust too much to your Honor and Constancy to fear any Rival; but there is
a more dangerous Enemy alarms my Love, my Mother-in-Law, who, like a Fury, was
just now haunting Sir Maurice, to fret and torment him into Compliance


As you trust to my Constancy, fair Mariana, trust also to my Care and
Diligence, the witty Wife shall not hector long, the Plot is ripe; and the
faithful couple, Trap and Lucy, bid me not doubt of success


But as to the Directions you sent me in your Note.


You know it is both to make our selves sport with the Cambridge Ninny, and to
remove the Brute; put on for once the Vizard of a Coquet, and you shall see
rare play


Were it not to secure Clerimont to my Wishes, I could never have prevailed
with my self to bestow one kind Word, or smiling Look on his Rival


This is the only time, Madam, I shall ever ask you to dissemble.


Then let him come when he will, I Will play the Jesuit for once; and while I
throw away fond Speeches upon him, direct my Intention to you


But here comes the Booby --


You see, Sir, I am here beforehand with you; but, I vow, my waiting for you
did not at all seem tedious to me: Mrs. Meanwell is so transported at the
thoughts of her approaching Happiness, that she could not forbear telling me a
thousand pretty things of her Love, or boasting pleasantly, how blessed she would
soon be in a Husband


Perhaps so.


What, you a Lover, Sir! and so long from your Mistress?


Softly, softly, Madam! [To Cler.] She comes on rarely.


Did not I tell you, Sir?


[Looking on Cler.] Oh! how ravished, how transported am I! to see the man my
Heart adores; I would not change for an Empire the Blessing of so charming a
sight


Oddzookers! how brisk she is, she takes fire in a moment.


Stand upon your Guard, Sir; stand upon your Guard, I say.


Oh! I see Love playing in his Eyes, and little Cupids hid in every Smile.


By the University, she is Romantic!


Oh! how impatiently do I live, till I am yours.


'Dslife, she begins to grow uneasy!


No doubt of it, Sir.


to Cler. Defer my Happiness no longer if you love me, you are sure of my
Heart; why should you desire any further Trial of my Constancy


Hold, Lady Pert, hold, not so quick, I pray, I am not the Fool you imagine;
thank our Stars, the Witlesses are noted in the World for Brains; I will not be
caught, not I


What means my dear Heart, why so alarmed?


What do I mean, say you? I mean, that you shall not make a Cuckold of me, by the
University you shall not


Bless me! why such Discourse, my pretty Fool?


Fool your self -- That Is all, forsooth; I did not know you before; but I am
pretty well informed now what you are, I Will not marry a Coquet, not I --


to Cler. Oh! it is all in vain, I love none but you, and none but you will I
ever have


Stop there, says Tim, I Will take care of that Miss, the Witlesses shall never
Reproach me for bringing Infamy into their Honorable Family


[Making as if she were crying.] Oh! I can hold no longer, you are too
barbarous, Tigers are not more Unnatural than you are


Why so severe upon the Lady, Sir? -- I am sorry now I was the occasion of
this, I protest I am


Let her cry, what is that to me? Look you, Master, Marcus Tullius Hudibras
says, That Women's Tears are like the Crocodile's, shed only to pity Fools into
Ruin


But, Sir, Methinks the tenderness of the Sex --


Sweet Mr. Le Brall, let her blubber out her Venom. Did you never hear the
saying of the wise man in Plutarch; When Dogs fall a snarling, Serpents a
hissing, and Women a crying; the first means to bite, the second to sting, and
the third to deceive


Sir, your Suspicions do me an injury.


I Will take care, Mrs. Liquorish, your Frolicks shall do me none.


But will not you hear me, Mr. Witless?


Hear you! no -- I Will have nothing to do with you, my Soul abhors you. Farewell
coqueting, cheating, canting, cozening Flirt, farewell to you for ever


And farewell to you, my dear Fool.


You have acted your part to a miracle, the Coxcomb seems to be pretty well
cured of his Love; however, for fear of a Relapse, I Will Encourage honest Trap
to go on in his Projects


Oh! are you there?


Well, Sir, have your Arguments prevailed? May I flatter my self with the hopes
that your Lady --


Oh! my Wife is a Devil, a very Devil, Sir; she uses Magic on my Conscience,
it cannot be otherwise when I am from her, no man has more Courage than I, I
fell my self full of Spirit and Resolution, but I am no sooner got to her
again, but three of her words, like a Spell, turn me into a Coward; I tried but
just now, and as she spoke, I protest, methought I heard Hell roaring, I ran
away for fear


This Devil might be resisted, Sir, if you would.


O dear, Sir! will you then give over? Will you leave your helpless Daughter
exposed thus to --


What would you have me do? You would not have me encounter Hell surely, would
you? O Citizens, Citizens! how much better for a Wife is a quiet Fool, than a
witty Scold!


Be gone, Trapes, be gone, and be never so daring, as to show your Face in my
House again


Alack, alack! she is come to conjure, I see a Devil before me already.


What Is the matter now, Lucy?


You may ask my Lady, for she turns me away, and will not tell me why.


Come, my dear Angel, my Paradise, don't be so severe to Maiana's maid, she is
a good Servant, you know


How now, Solomon of the City, will you offer to take her part?


Oh Lord! not at all, my Dear, I only ask what it is she has done.


What? Am I then to give Reasons for what I do?


I do not say you are, my Jewel.


I will not be contradicted, Sir Maurice, you know it well enough.


I find it so, my Honey-suckle, but if you love me, let me hear what is her
Fault; has she by chance broken some of your fine China, I can buy more for you


What a pitiful fancy is there, as if so trivial a thing could discompose my
morals


Then it is something of great moment I see, has she stolen some of your Plate?


That were but a Trifle.


Oh! Oh! Mrs. Lucy, have you played the Thief, and pawned her Jewels?


A great deal worse still.


Worse still, say you? Then she has desiled my House, it must be so; Oh the
Baggage


All this were nothing in comparison of that horrid, scandalous, and exorbitant
Offense she is guilty of; hear it, Sir Maurice, since you have such a mind to
it, and excuse her if you can with an Impudence beyond Example, and a show of
Ignorance that cannot be paralleled in History; she had just now the ill
manners to say in my hearing, That Cowley, the wretched Cowley, was as good a
Poet, as the incomparable Sir Maggott Jingle


And is this all? Heaven be thanked; I thought she had at least set my House on
fire, or ravished my Butler


What Is this mighty Wonder now? Is a Crime of this Nature a slight matter think
you


With submission to the Wits, Madam, I do not conceive such a Fault as this is
punishable by the Laws of England; besides, I never knew before, that my Maid
was hired to admire Sir Maggot Jingle


How now, little Mushroom? Are you one of her Advocates too? I shall indeed
mind your pretty Reasons


You Will want your faithful Consident, Sister.


I hope there will be no need of a Consident soon.


I understand your meaning, pretty Miss, but your Business is done. I can
assure you -- Sir Maurice, I expect Sir Timothy here this Evening to seal the
Writings, be you in the way -- [To Mariana.] And you that have hitherto
controlled my Will, show your self Refractory now if you dare


My Father's Commands shall ever be a supreme Law to me.


Then you are to learn, Mrs. Lackwit, that it must be my Husband's will, since
it is my Pleasure: Hold your impertinent Tongue I say, I am weary of your
Nonsense -- Sir Maurice, I Will in and give Orders for the Wedding, as I shall
think sit in my Wisdom -- [To Lovewit.] You Daughter, send immediately to Mr.
Engross not to fail at the Hour appointed


I am sorry, Sister, Fortune proves so cross to your Wishes; this World is full
of Disappointments


Now you see it very plain, I hope, that she is a Witch, my Heart trembled
every Word she spoke. What do you think on it? Tell me freely, is she not an
Enchantress? A pox of a Philosopher for a Wise, who the Devil would marry Wit


It Is more her Noise than her Wit keeps you in awe, Sir; raise but your Voice
louder than hers when she offers to speak, and you will silence her, I warrant you


Oh, dear Sir! on my Knees let me entreat you, do not abandon me to her
unreasonable Humor, make use of your Power, you may do it, it is nothing but
Goodness, too much Goodness in your makes her thus haughty and imperious


I vow, Sir, all the Neighborhood cries shame upon you.


I am as desirous to have her Will opposed in this as any of you can be; but
what can I do? How shall I deal with a Devil, that can at her pleasure send a
Legion of Evil Spirits to haunt and tear me a-pieces


With all her Spells, and Magic Art, Sir; take my word, your Lady cannot raise
but one Evil Spirit, and that is her own; but if you dare to put on a good
Resolution, and follow my Directions, we'll conquer that Evil Spirit, I warrant
you


Once more, good Sir, try what you can do, the Happiness of your own Child
depends upon it -- Take pity of my Love


Come, Sir, pluck up a Courage, stand upon your Prerogative.


Well -- If you will second me, I Will in, and let her know who is her Master.


Well said.


Tell her that none ought to rule in my Family but I.


Vigorously spoken.


Declare to her that you must be my Son in Law, and no body else.


Kindly and Bravely resolved.


And that if she offers to contradict me, I Will shut her up.


In Bedlam, I hope.


Come then, follow me all, and be sure to stand by me.


Don't you fear it, Sir.


LOok you Roger, 50 l. is the Sum, and the task but easy, for the Man is both
a Fool and a Coward


Honest Jack, Let me alone with him; You know I Would hang my Own Father for half
the Money, but where is the Woman


Oh! Leave that part to me; I Will produce her in good time: -- But here comes
the Property, put on your Bloody Looks

I tell you Sir, My Master is a Man of Honor.


With all my heart, Sir.


A Man of Courage, Sir.


All the better Sir; all the better.


That has learnt to fence a whole Week; and shown his Valor against the
boldest Prentices in Cambridge


His Valor! Blood and Thunder! Let me see him. Ounds would I had him here. --
There at his Heart, -- There under the Second Rib; -- Curse on the ill luck, I have not killed a Man these three Days, and my Arm grows stiff for want of
Exercise


Pray Sir, Good Sir, be not so furious if you can help it; My Master is a
Gentleman understands Reason as well as any body; He Will give you all the
Satisfaction you can desire, I Am sure; but pray put up Sir, put up, let me
entreat you


Well, Sir, Let Us hear what is it you have to say?


I say, Sir, That this Gentleman here is my Master, and can give you the best
Answer


Humh, Sir, are you the Man they call Mr. Witless?


At your Service, good Sir, Honorable Sir.


Service! Blood and Thunder! It Is Justice I Will have, and no Service.


Pray, Sir, Moderate your Passion.


Impertinent Varlet! hold thy peace, I charge you --


I Sir! I protest I do not know you! I beg your pardon! -- Alas, alas, Jack!


Not know me, Blood and Thunder! perhaps so; but you know a Relation of mine,
and with a Pox to you, you have known her to good purpose


Trap, Dear Trap, what is this? Can you guess what it is the Gentleman means?


Not I, by Jericho; I am thinking all this while, what can be the meaning of
all this stuff


Blood and Thunder! What must you stand there asking one another Questions; I
tell you Sir, there are two ways and no more, either you must Marry my Cozen,
you have after a most felonious manner impregnated, or else give me leave to
cut your Throat presently


O Sweet Sir, Gracious Sir, look upon me; I am not the Man you take me for.


Blood and Thunder! don't you think I Will be put off with a Story; I Will have
every drop of thy Blood before I Will suffer mine to be stained: Here is a Paper
you must Sign, or by Lucifer the next word you speak, for a denial, I Will make
the whole Firmament shine through your Liver


But kind honey Sir, is there no way to accommodate --


What more Questions, you Pragmatical Dog, I Will order you.


I mean no harm to you, Good Sir, but methinks --


Impudent Sycophant, I Will nail thy prating Tongue to the Wall.


Good sweet obliging Sir, may I speak two words with my Man.


Be short, Rot you, be short.


Look you Jack, this scurvy Paper is nothing less than a promise of Marriage in
Blank; for ought I know I may be Married one of these days to some filthy
Sucbubus; He threatens to kill me if I don't Sign it; What must I do Jack,
speak, what must I do


Do? That Is a pretty Question indeed; Rather dye a thousand times and more,
than consent to such Infamy; This is some Impudent trick I warrant it, the
hussing Rascal has some Strumpet or other whom he has a mind to put off; Fight
it out for shame --


Then Trap be stout; Come, you Blood and Thunder, here is my Answer for you.


Are you for the sport then? have at you.


Push on brave Jack, push on.


Don't you fear Sir, spare him not -- At his Heart directly if you can.


You Pandar, stand off, or by the Bloody Bones of Dagon, this Steel shall make
it self a passage to his Heart through yours


I Scorn your Words Sir, I Will dye upon the spot, rather than forsake my good
Master; Thrust on Sir, thrust on, we'll Swindge him I warrant you


Then Villain, take this --


Oh Sir! Valiant Sir, put up I beseech you, I Will do any thing, I Will sign any
Paper, I Will Marry any body


I am very glad, Sir, to see you come to reason, for I have a great Esteem for
you, and 'twould have gone against my Heart, I vow, to kill a Gentleman who is
to be my near Relation; here is the Paper, Sir, be pleased to set your hand to
it, I love to be Civil


Ay Sir; But if the Lady --


Blood and Thunder! What more reasoning yet. --


Oh! No Sir, give me, give me --


Now dear Cozen Witless, your most humble Servant; I esteem my self very happy
in the honor of your Alliance


Pox of his Honor, -- By the University I Am in a fine Pickle, bound to Marry a
VVitch for ought I can tell; and my Honest, my Faithful, my Fighting Trap
murdered


Bless me, Sir, is the Man gone?


Oh Fortune! Trap alive?


Ay Alive, and Unhurt, I hope.


How! Unhurt, Jack; Did not I see you fall Dead upon the place?


No, on my word, Sir, 'twas only a certain Giddiness takes me at the sight of a
Naked Sword; it is an infirmity I had from my Youth


Pray feel Jack if I am wounded; I may be Killed for ought I know.


Nay you are in the right, for in the heat of Fighting it is seldom wounds are
felt, can you VVhistle, let us hear. --

Oh rare! I warrant you Living, and as sound as a Roach; but pray now, what
have you done about the Paper, the Cursed Paper


Oh! The Villain made me set my Hand to it; I thought, Jack, 'twas better doing
so, than be butchered by that Turk, and Infidel; His very Looks are enough to
fright one out of Life; I vow as he stood thrusting at us, methought I saw
Death and Massacre peeping out of the Corners of his Eyes; but I Will be even
with him, I warrant him, for before Sir Timothy can hear of this, I Will to my
Uncle in the Temple, and Hang the Rogue


Pray while his hand is in, let him dispatch the Lady in Blank too, for if the
Jade be once hanged, no Law in England can oblige you to marry her


Well considered Faith; follow me Jack, and let us lose no time.


By no means Sir.

Hanging will fail, I know, but I decree,
The Marriage-Knot shall more successful be;
And of these two the Destinies have told,
No matter which, so either of 'em hold.

BUt, Sir, a Coquet, a French Coquet, the word frights me; She Will have too much
mettle for me: I shall be a Cuckold by the University I shall


I have known your Mistress from a Child, Tim, and I am satisfied with my
Choice; take this from me, Young Man, there is more Innocence in that brisk,
pleasant, and free humor of hers, than in the sullen, rigid, and severe temper
of many of her Sex, who thinking their Character secures 'em even from the
Suspicion of Vice, Blind and deceive the World with a false appearance of
Virtue, only to play their Under-game the more securely


But, Sir, is there no certain compass for a Man to steer by upon the stormy
Sea of Matrimony, without splitting against the Rock of Cuckoldom


There is no certain rule for it, Tim; however, let me give you this advice,
Love your Wise heartily and sincerely, be kind and faithful to her, and do not
starve her Longings; This is the best rule I know to keep her honest


'Dslife! must a Husband then be bound to his good behavior?


Yes certainly; for it is the most Unaccountable thing in the World for a Man
to complain that his Wife is not Virtuous, to whom he gives the worst Example
for Vice; Her disloyalty cannot be justified that is true; but still his anger
is Unreasonable. Look to your self Tim when you come to be Married, for on my
conscience it is a dangerous thing to provoke a Wise, who has always a revenge
at hand


But, Sir, I may be kind to my Wife, and yet a Cuckold, what then?


Oh! In that case Boy, you must, like a Wise Alderman, put your Hands into
your Pockets and VVhistle


Zookers! and is this all?


No Tim, there is still this comfort left you, that the Horners of the Town
make some Conscience of their way, and are not quite so bad as Thieves and
Robbers, who plunder and go away with all; No, the Gentlemen are mannerly, I
must say that for 'em, for if they by chance break in, they take but just as
much as will serve their turn, and always leave enough for a Man


Mercy, Sir! commend me to good breeding; but still my Honor Sir, my Honor:
can your Mannerly Gentlemen take it away by bits and halves too


Honor Boy is but the Vulgar Error of Jealousy, or the Bugbear of a Sick
fancy; make no noise Tim and all may be well, for to my knowledge many a Man go
for Cuckolds in the World, who are not really so, and many are deeply so, who
have not the reputation of it. -- But here come the Ladies


Come Mr. Engross, you must change your rude and barbarous Style, and put these
Articles of Marriage into more rhetorical Language; try if you can Hourish them
a little with a few passages out of Parthenissa, Grand Cyrus, or so


Our style, Madam, is like the Laws of the Medes and Serpents unalterable.


Your Custom is a strange Tyrant sure, methinks you might at least be so
Gentile, as to date after the Roman manner, by Ides and Calends


This is a contract between English Parties, and no Romans, Madam, You confound
me


But for all you Mr. Engross, when I Marry, which I know will be soon now, I Will
have all my VVritings drawn in Hieroglyphics, and some Egyptian Priest, or
Brachman of India to perform the Office


Faith, Lady, those Gentlemen live a great way off, and if you stay to Marry,
till their arrival, your Virginity will deserve a place in the Oxford
Nackatory, among the pieces of Antiquity


Remember, Sir, that your Wife is but a Woman, a mere Woman, and no Devil, no
Enchantress


I Will order her, I warrant you, do but observe me.


Consider, Dear Sir, I Am undone if she prevails.


Don't you fear it, Child.


I cannot but admire at my Sister's fancy; that she should bring in Clerimont,
to be a Witness of his Rivals Triumph


You are mistaken still in Clerimont, Niece, he is carrying on another Intrigue
than People imagine; I say little, but the thing will soon come out


Are you ready Mr. Engross?


I want only the Names of the Parties; which is the Bride pray?


Here Sir, my Daughter-in-Law.


Very well; her Name is Mariana, Sir.


Now for the Bridegroom.


Here Is the Gentleman, Sir, Mr. Timothy Witless.


And I say here is the Gentleman, Sir, Mr. Charles Clerimont.


Hey day! Two Husbands to one Wife, that is more than the Law allows, though
perhaps no more than a Woman could very well dispense withal


Why do you regard what other people say, Mr. Engross?


Did I not name Clerimont to you? what makes you stare?


Uddsbudds! agree among your selves if you will, I Will go no further else.


What a Pox, my Dancing Master my Rival; Old Sir Maurice sure, has a mind to
make himself merry with him. --


There Is a Lady and a Gentleman below, Sir, have earnest business with you.


Surely thou art mad, could not thou tell 'em I was abroad.


Oh Sir! You never saw such a Man in your Life, 'm sure; I told him a thousand
times at least, that you were here about business of great Importance; but he
very unmannerly clapped a Pistol to my Breast, and Swore I was a dead Man, if I
did not bring him to you immediately


What can this mighty business be? -- With Sir Maurice's leave bring 'em in.


Come make an end, Mr. Engross, do as I bid you, for I have past my word, and I
will not be an Ass


And so have I, Sir Maurice, and I will not be a Goose, but since there is no
remedy, and my will I must have in spite of your Teeth, my Daughter here shall
disengage your word, the Gentleman, if he knows how to value Wit, will thank
me sure for this piece of Condescension


Your Daughter, Madam, may be a Miracle of Wit and Beauty, but still I cannot
but glory in owning to you, that I had rather dye a thousand times than
renounce my Love


They might have proposed one to him, I know, would have been more acceptable.


There was no need for you, Sir, to put your self to the Expense of so fiery a
protestation; I am not in so desperate a condition yet, as to rob my Sister of
her few Admirers


I shall never desire, Madam, to put you to the trial.


An Impostor! Blood and Thunder! I an Impostor! we shall try that, by Lucifer,
we shall


Pray, Sir, what is the matter? why in such a passion?


Sir I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon; You look like a Gentleman, and
though a Stranger to me I Will not scruple to make you a Judge between Sir
Timothy, and this disconsolate Lady: Let me but compose my self a little, for
his rudeness has strangely disordered me


O sweet Honey! Cream of my Joys, have I found thee at last, I must Hugg thee;
I must Buss thee till my Lips ach


Away, Satan, away; I know thee not.


O dear pretty smiling Rogue, how I Love thee! How Charmingly thou look; I
vow thou were unkind not to write to me, I must Kiss thee for that too


By the University, the Women of this Town are as hot as Hellfire.


I shall not trouble you, Sir, with a long story; the Gentlewoman you see here
is a near Relation of mine, who lived in Cambridge; She always had the
reputation of as Modest and Virtuous a Lady as ever that Town bred, but her
Eyes having the fatal Luck to boil Mr. Witless's Blood into a Ferment, the
young Gentleman would never be satisfied without a full Enjoyment of her
Unfortunate body: She held out a great while, the poor Creature, but the Devil
being powerful, and Female Flesh Frail and Willing, she was forced to
Capitulate, and surrender the Fort of her Honor upon Articles; to be short
Sir, he gave her a promise of Marriage: Now hearing he was to be married to
another, I made bold to intrude my self, the business being of such
consequence, as will I hope Apologize for the freedom


I assure you Sir, it is an Impudent Lie, the fellow has told, examine into the
business a little, and you shall see


Oddslicks! There was no need, Sir, of Apology for your coming; you are most
Welcome I promise you, make the most you can of your business


Sir, may I speak two words with you?


Ay, Sir, with all my Heart.


You talk of a Promise of Marriage under my Son's hand, where is that Promise,
pray, where is it


Not far Sir, -- Witless his Body.


I have two Sir, --


Tim. is this your hand? Look?


Yes, Sir, so far I own.


'Sdlife! What will come of this pretty Story, there would be a wonder now,
Ladies, should a Scholar prove a Fornicator like other Men


Oh the filthy Monster! Is this your Cambridge breeding with a Pox?


I protest Sir, I am innocent, I never laid with a Woman in my life --


But twice with a Rope to you! what must you be a thousand times about it?


I Swear by both the Proctors of the University, I never attempted any thing
upon the Sex -- without their consent


Now Lady, surely here is a Lawful Impediment with a Vengeance, why Mr. Witless
should not be joined in Matrimony to my Daughter


I Will Examine the Woman --


Your Son, Sir, Knew me first at Cambridge.


Did he Visit you often Mistress?


Not often; but when he did, 'twas to some purpose, I assure you, the last time
he carried me to Trumpington, there he Feasted me, the good Man, I never saw
him so wanton in my Life


Trumpington! Oh the Damned Town! It lies upon the Road to Hell; I lost my
Maidenhead there before I knew I had one -- But pray how far are you gone
Mistress


My reckoning, Sir, as one may say, is from Sturbitch-Fair, we had a merry
meeting there, I assure you, I shall remember it as long as I live


Oh, it is too true! I Will ask no more questions; I remember now I sent him his
Quarter about that time, it must be so; Oh the Villain


Now Witty Females; what have you to say to this? You may bragg of your
Scholars indeed


Brother, this failure of the Flesh is a Natural propensity, against which our
Philosophy prescribes no Rules


Give me leave, Sir, but to speak now in my defense; and I Will warrant you I Will
make it as plain as any thing --


Hold thy peace then Silly Puppy -- Trap, I have given thee Warning, that is
true, but thou art a Civil Fellow; I Will keep thee, if thou can do me a piece
of Service


Oh Sir! Do you question my Zeal? You wrong me I vow, were I to be dismissed
next Minute, I would part with you like a Christian; pray what is the business,
Sir


You see, Trap, this unlucky Wench is like to spoil my Son's match, I would
have you take the man to your self, and try what you can do with him. If a
Present of 500 Guinea's will satisfy him, I Will give it freely; in the mean
while, I Will make Sir Maurice believe 'twas only a mistake


Do you but look well to your part, Sir, and trust me with mine, and I Will
warrant you, things will go swimmingly on our side


[To Sir Maur.] All this Story, Sir Maurice, proves at last nothing but a
mistake; the man took my Son for one Jeremy Witless of Bristol, now Listed in
Flanders


I thought indeed, a man of Greek and Latin was above those Infirmities.


Blood and Thunder, 500 Guinea's! I Will hang the whole Generation of 'em before
I take 6000 l. What, for pitiful 500 l. sell the Honor of my Family


Sir Timothy, what is the matter now with the Gentleman? He makes a noise, and
talks, I think, of 6000 l


The poor man is mad I fancy, that he has missed his Prey; I suppose he says,
he would give 6000 l. to find him out


[Breaking off from Trap.] Blood and Thunder, let me go; I Will cut the Throat of
Father and Son, or I Will have better satisfaction before I part


I am sorry, Brother, I must make of this Day of Joy the most melancholy Day of
your Life, by imparting to you the saddest News you could expect


Oh Heavens! Brother, what is it?


Our Hamburgh Ship has brought this dismal Account, that Mynheer Van Punk is
broke, and --


Alas! alas! I am undone, undone for ever, 20000 l. at a clap, I shall not be
able to show my Head


Oh the unseasonable Misfortune!


Why so concerned, Sir Maurice? What, now your weak and puny Soul must fret,
and be disturbed at this! Thanks to Philosophy, mine is firm and unshaken


My Fortune is safe still; what Love could not do, Interest may -- I Will not
despair


Oddszookers! the Case is altered: Hark you, Tim, I have always observed, that
a man never thrives in the World that has wronged a modest Woman; therefore in
point of Interest, as well as Conscience, you must marry this Lady, and as a
Penance for your not Renouncing the Flesh, Woman, and the Devil, swallow the
bitter Cup of Matrimonial Twist


I marry that Woman! Sir, I beg your Pardon, I should be a Cornuto, and you
know it is the only thing I hate


Good Boy, a man makes himself ridiculous in the World, that affects
Singularity in any thing; you will be Cuckolded a little before your time, that is
true, but it is the fashion now, therefore no Soul living will take notice of it


Is it so upon your word, Sir? Or do you jest?


Ay, Tim, upon my honest word it is even so -- Cuckoldom is a raging Grievance
of the Nation for all my mincing the matter. Just now, believe me, as many men
as you see walking in the Streets, are as many Cuckolds


How so, pray? They are not all married sure.


There is all the difference, Boy; with those that are married their business
is done, with those that are not, their business is now doing: It was so with
you, and just so 'twill be with 'em, comfort your self with that


I am as glad as any thing it is so, I protest I am, for to tell you the truth,
the thing disturbed me a little; but since you say it is the Mode, I scorn to be
singular


Besides, Tim, Mrs. Meanwell has now lost her Fortune, and Beggar for Beggar,
it is much better for us you marry this good Lady here, for by this means we
avoid a chargeable Suit, the man was talking of no less than 6000 l. Damages;
hang him, 6000 l. would undo us --


By the University, I do not think there is one thousand Pounds difference
between an Honest Woman, and a Common one


Oh the Brute! what pity 't had been a Woman of Virtue had fallen to the Lot
of such a Fool, who does not understand the Value of so great a Treasure


By the tip of Plato's Ear, I am of the opinion of that famous Poet Tacitus,
who says, He had rather be Cuckolded by a pretty coaksing loving Wife, than
escape the Dishonor, either through the Ugliness, or the surly Virtue of one
peevishly Honest


Sir Timothy, I rejoice to see things run thus in a right Channel, and to make
my Joy complete, I have but one Favor more to beg of you, viz. That Mr.
Witless, and my dear Relation here, may be joined instantly, for I am commanded
with my Regiment for Flanders to morrow early, and I should not cross the Sea
with a quiet Mind, should I leave this piece of Work unfinished


With all my Heart, Sir, but where shall we find an Executioner?


I have a Levitical Conjurer below, who, with Sir Maurice's leave, will give us
a touch of his Black Art


My House, Sir, is at your service.


What say you to it, Tim? Come hang Consideration, the shortest Follies are
best


Come then, Pig in a Poke, away to the Conjurer, thou art not the first has
carried a great Belly to the Parson


Clerimont, I promised my self a great deal of Happiness in the Honor of your
Alliance; but since my Hopes are defeated, and I cannot, in the Circumstances I
am in at present, offer poor Mariana to you for a Wife; I must thank you for
your Civilities to her, and wish you somewhere else a Fortune answerable to
your Merit


You offend me, Sir Maurice, with this Discourse: As it was not for her Fortune
I courted your fair Daughter, so this Loss shall make no change in me; I love
her better than ever I did, all I have in the World is hers, and consequently
at your service


Then farewell to my Hopes there, I am put to my last Prayers indeed, but rather
than fail I Will make sure of Sir Maggot Jingle, his Wit shall be my Excuse


No, Clerimont, you are too Generous, and whatever Violence I do to my
Inclination in pronouncing the Words, we must part, Fortune has crossed my
Wishes, and placed my Heart beneath you


Oh killing words! Cruel Mariana! do you, do you oppose my Happiness? Who could
have suspected it? My Heart was not prepared for so severe a stroke


It Is not, Clerimont, because I hate you, or love you less; Heaven, that sees
into my Breast, knows how pure and sincere is my Love for you, but I am
sensible that your Estate requires a present Fortune to make you easy: I
wished to be yours, when I had reason to hope my Father's Kindness would have
made us live happily in the World; but since Heaven has decreed otherwise, I
must not be so ungrateful to your Love, as to desire to be an Obstacle to your
Fortune


If you have not a mind, Divine Mariana, to see a sad Lover expire at your
Feet, forbear talking, any more of Fortune, the whole World without you cannot
make me happy, and with you I am richer than the greatest Monarch upon Earth


Fortune, which has robbed me of all my Hopes, could not rob you of my Heart,
it is yours, Clerimont, in spite of her, and if I owed it all before to your
Love, what can I give now to your Generosity


Your self, Madam, and in you all that this World can gratify my Ambition
withal


I fancy the Sin is worth the owning, the Creature feels as a sound piece of
Mortality; it is but supposing the first night we lay together, that we have
been married 4 or 5 months, and all is well


Good Tim, my mind is now at ease, to see you a man like my self, and by this
Heroic Act of yours do I know you to be of the true Blood of the Witlesses,
who for these five Generations have outbraved Cuckoldom: Come, thou art a good
Boy, and have the true notion of the thing


Nay, I think I am as good a man as I was before; my Leg is as straight now as
it was in the morning, and I find not the least alteration in my Health; why
should I be melancholy? I see no cause, not I


This is the Wheel of Fortune, Mr. Witless; when People boast of Favors they
never enjoyed, they come often to father Children they never got:


Hell and Furies! what have we here?


Honest Lucy, at your service, as pure a Virgin as ever was born -- for all
your bragging, Mr. Witless --


Trap, you Trap, by the University thy pretty Sister -- Oddszooks! it is well
it is no worse


I had a pretty Match for her in my Eye, but since Destiny throws her upon you,
I Will not contend with your Stars; take her and wear her, she is yours, I hope
you will use her civilly


Surely Sir Timothy will not suffer his witty Son to be thus prostituted to an
illiterate Abigail --


Not I, by Hell! This is an impudent Cheat, a Trick of that Rascal there, I
smoke it out, but I Will see 'em all hanged; I Will to Justice immediately:
Justice! Justice


You may hang the rest if you please, Father, but I Will take care to hang this
little Rogue my self: Come, dear Lucy, thou melting Sugar Loaf of Pleasure,
thou art a good Girl, by the University I always loved thee; give me thy Hand,
I Will say it once more, thou art my Wife: Let Sir Timothy fume, my Mother's Land
is 500 l. per Annum, and that is enough for us: Hocus Pocus, thou art a Maid to
day, I Will make thee a Woman to morrow


So much Justice you owe me, I Am sure for your vain boasting; but look to your
self now, I Will be even with you, I warrant you, and turn your Fictions into
Real History with a Vengeance


Now, Lady Grumble, are you convinced that Mr. Witless is not to have my
Daughter? Shall we at last have the favor of your Consent for this Gentleman


No, Sir Maurice, not as long as I breath; what, do you think I Will admit into
my Family a Despiser of Wit, one who knows well enough I Am an Author, and never
had the manners to ask me to read any of my Works to him


I am not, Madam, such an Enemy to Wit as your Ladyship makes me, I love it but
as a Gentleman, without either Pride or Affectation; I could Entertain the
Company with a small Essay of my Poetry, a SONG I made yesterday, if you could
promise your selves patience enough to hear it


Hear it? Ay, with all our Hearts; who is there to sing it?


LOve, thou art best of Human Joys,
Our chiefest Happiness below,
All other Pleasures are but Toys;
Music, without thee, is but Noise,
And Beauty but an empty Show.
Heaven, who knew best what Man could move,
And raise his Thoughts above the Brute,
Said, Let him be, and let him love,
That must alone his Soul improve,
However Philosophers dispute.


I protest the man writes well enough for a Fiddler.


Oh rare! I hope your Ladyship is satisfied now.


Yes, Sir Maurice, I Am satisfied that that man must be your Son-in-Law; and my
Reason for it is, because he is a Ninny, and a Booby


'Sdeath! what a Babel is here? Where are we now?


Where are we, say you? In the worst place in the World for Manners sure; what
for a man to be so hardy, so Effronte, and so destitute of Politeness and
Complisance, as to affront Philosophy to my face, is a Crime never to be atoned
for, however Philosophers dispute, quoth he: That Is as much as to say, we are
Fools; my Sister, Daughter, and I, all Fools


I never heard my Sister draw a more natural Conclusion in my Life.


But I Will revenge Philosophy I Am resolved; and to make an Example of this
Unmannerly Composer of Songs, I Will inflict upon him the Curse of a poor silly
Portionless Wife. Sir Mauriee, whether you will or no, that ignorant Songster
there shall have your Daughter, his shallow Wit will fit her little Genius, as
well as her Hamburgh Fortune his shattered Estate


Please your self, Madam, with your mean Railleries, I am sensible of nothing
but my present Happiness


Did not I tell you, Mariana, we should carry the day? I knew well enough I
should bring it to pass. Now we are all pleased, I hope


Only, poor Sister Catchat, she has reason to take it ill, that in so plentiful
a distribution of Human Flesh she can catch nothing, but must at last take up
with her Men in the Moon, or her Visions and Chimera's


Ay, Chimera's; let my Niece look to her self, there reigns one still in
Clerimont's Heart will make her live uneasy all her days, let me tell her
that, and so Adieu


Insert this in the Articles, Mr. Engross; I charge you, that this illiterate
Couple shall never come into my House, I Will not be pestered with stupid
Creatures, not I


Not into my House? By my Lord Maylor I Will leave you, Lady Petulant, with your
Jingles to make Almanacks and Ballads


Yes, yes, the World shall see how much I value Wit in spite of Fools; Sir
Maggot Jingle shall be my Son-in-Law, and for the future none shall be admitted
into my House but Beaux Esprits; therefore, Sir Maurice, think of another
Habitation for your self


You are Master of my House, Sir, and shall Command in it more absolutely than
you did in your own


The Kindness, Sir, will be seasonable.


Then since you are pleased so impertinently to Insult, know, Sister, to your
confusion, that the News from Hamburgh is false, that my Niece's Fortune is not
lost, but rather improved by a considerable Return. I put this trick upon you
to try your Philosophy, and let the World see to the bottom of Female Wits


Oh, dear Brother, you revive me! How happy am I, that I have still a fortune
to make a Return to Clerimont's Generosity -- Essex


This will complete my Happiness, Heaven be thanked: I shall have all I could
wish for in this World, my Father, and Clerimont


And blessed be my Stars, say I, that Ignorance and Wit shall dwell no more
together; farewell rude and unpolished Crowd: You witty Daughter of mine, follow
me


Brother, let this Day be Celebrated as a Day of Joy and Deliverance to your
Family, from the Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power of a Proud, Scolding,
Whimsical, Philosophical Wife: You have now got a second that will stand by
you, I Am sure. Let not therefore an impertinent Female Wit Usurp again so
unreasonable an Empire over you


I Will make the best of your Advice to be sure; but, good Brother, whatever the
Task may seem to one without Experience, take my word all married men find it a
difficult one


Man first was destined for the Sovereign Sway,
But haughty Woman, scorning to obey,
Called to her Beauty's Aid, the Serpent's Art,
Surprised his Reason, and Ensnared his Heart:
Since when we struggle for our Right in vain,
Their Tongues and Eyes will still the Rule maintain. etc.
Spoken by Mrs. Catchat.

I Tried to leave you, Gentlemen, in vain,
The rest are gone, but I Am returned again;
And that you're pleased, my Vanity discovers,
I Will set you all down in my List of Lovers,
And think you so, whatever Defense you make;
Nay more, I Will prove is for my Humour's sake,
That none are Happy, but through some Mistake.
The fairest Nymph that thinks she has gained a Heart,
And does her Favors, with her Smiles, impart,
Whilst here the Spark practices all his Graces,
Never thinks, alas! they are levelled at new Faces,
Cheated on still by his Persidious Eyes,
She vainly fancies, it is for her he dies.
The Elder Ladies too, of past Renown,
Have their Mistakes; Stale Fortunes of the Town
Think there is no Lord, but might have been their own.
And slighting Lovers of their Fancy born,
Starve for that Blessing they affect to Scorn;
At length Despised, turn Censurers, and Nice,
And boast of Virtue, 'cause unfit for Vice.
You, Rising Suns, who see their dreadful Fate,
Take Warning, Marry ever it be too late,
For Youth's the surest Charm to Captivate.
Our Author too, for who so Vain as they,
Would needs believe that you Approve his Play;
Even humor him for Once, and give him Cause,
Warm him but with the Fire of your Applause.
Then, If again his Muse her Voice shall raise,
Yours be the Merit, yours be all the Praise;
You make the POET, he but makes the PLAYS.

