AS murmuring Oceans lulled to Peaceful ease.

As murmuring Oceans lulled to Peaceful ease.

What means the fool?

To play the fool and please:
You bring a tedious simile so flat
Of Oceans, winds and waves, with the Devil knows what,
And think to please with style so great and gaudy --

What would you say, Sir?

Why I Would speak bawdy.
A smutty whim still the whole Audience takes,
Whim pleases Fools, and smuttyness the Rakes.

Nor Rakes, nor Fools, my business is to fear.

Then faith good Sir you have no business here.

To please the fair was my intended Rule.

Leave that to me, I best can play the Fool.

What! a buffoon Prologue to deep Tragic fear?

It Is new.

So is Nonsense.

No, not here.
Wit whets like Wine which before Meals we quaff,
To make the Ladys cry, first make 'em laugh.

Zoons Sir the Poet sent you here to trick me.

You and the Poet both are Coxcombs, snick me.

Then may his Play be damned, I humbly crave it.

Don't damn.

Damn it.

Don't swear.

Damn it.

Save it.


WEll Dafila, How do you like the Charge
The King, my Nephew; has preferred you to?
How fares the Beauteous Captive? Say my Son.

Deaf to all Joys but those she finds in Love:
Whole Crowds of Courtiers snarling, gaze upon me,
And Whispering, Curse the Partial Emperor;
Then swelling; call me Awkward Boy, and with
Their angry Brows threaten to foyl my Youth.

Your Innocence, my Child, which moved him to
Repose this Trust in you, will keep you safe.

Like new-fledg d Birds, untaught to fly, I strive,
And fain would bear me through the yielding Air;
I leap but fearfully from Shrub to Shrub,
Nor dare I trust the Unknown Heaven; Father,
You must direct my early Flights; take, take
Me on your Wing, and teach me how to beat
Secure in this uncertain Wavering Air.

What shall I teach thee, say my Dafila?

Since then the King can deign to look on me,
That I may not disgrace his Trust too far,
As my poor Ignorance, unused to Courts,
Must needs, unless you help; tell me, for I
Have naught distinctly heard, clear my dark thoughts,
Relate the source, and progress of these Wars,
What could induce our Mighty Emperor
To War upon Gualata's King, whom Fame
Reports as Bounteous as a God?

'Twas Love seduced our Monarchs heart,
The strongest passion, and the weakest too:
There was an infant Shipwrecked at Gualata,
So wondrous fair, our Africa stood amazed;
Afric, so used to Wonders, gazed at this;
Our Master, grown in Love, dispatched an Embassy
Of their Old King, Senega, then alive,
Demanding her, he was denied; her heart
Was to young Barnagasso deep engaged,
Who then resided there; the King not wont
To be refused, Swore to revenge the Affront;
Yet Cunning in his Rage, hid his Designs,
And, like a Serpent, circled in his Head,
Where every Passion as in Council sat
In the deepest center; but soon sallied forth,
And as she passed by Tombu's Frontiers to her Lord,
Surpised this Fair, who since in Tombu Mourns.

How did young Barnagasso brook this Rape?

His grief denied the common Outlet, tears,
Like Waters pent in hollow Caverns shook,
His Frame, then with an Earthquakes force,
Tore wide its narrow bounds, and burst the Deluge forth
With which overwhelmed, amidst his Guards
Thrice the brave Hero sunk; but soon he rose,
For rallying Reason wiped the Woman from his eyes,
And bold Revenge alone his thoughts employed.

For Injured Beauty, and a Ravished Wife
Revenge is surely just, but pray proceed.

The good old King had long indulged his ease,
His years had long excused him Wars rough toyls;
Yet now touched with his Darlings wrongs, he grieved
That he had been, but was no more, his Age
Reflected on the Battles which his youth had won,
With envious Pride surveyed his Wounds, inspired by these,
Like one in Renovating Juices steeped,
His Soul rowz'd from it is Lethargy, shook off
Inglorious ease, and boldly called for War;
But Fate designed his Soul for rest, he died;
And with his Crown Entailed the War
On Barnagasso, which he lead eager on resolved,
To hazard all for her Relief:
But soon your Brother stopped this Rapid Flood,
O'repow'rd with numbers this Invading King,
Whom now in Triumph he to Tombu leads,

By Heaven's this Story Warms, and Cools me too;
My Youthful blood boyls at the Thoughts of War,
And yet I Am cold, to think our Emperor
Should force such softness from her Virgin Flame,
How glorious would it be to curb his Love,
And give her Body where her Soul is placed?

You show your self a Novice every way,
This Fair unknown has such Inviting Charms
As may excuse the boldest Ravisher.

Oh, Father, you mistake, her Eyes would turn
His savage heart, he would Adoration pay
To that Fair Shrine which he could not pollute.

Yours is Aereal love, not fit for Kings,
Whose grosser apetites descend so low,
That but to purchase for themselves a moments bliss,
They Would sacrifice the quiet of another life;
But you should check my Boy this cheating flame,
Should this be known, your head must answer it.

It Is hard to dye for what we cannot help,
All Sects are pleased their God should be adored,
Why then should mighty Jamoan disallow my love?

Take heed, you're in the Court, where even your looks
Are too severely scanned, no word but's screwed
To a forced meaning: I must to the King,
Whom I begin to view with envious Eyes,
The growing mischief rolls disjointed here,

And wants a moments thought to ripen it;
My Child stay not long after me, the King
Expects you, to make up the Court to day.

Is it a fault to love in one so young?
What pity it is so sweet a bliss should not
Be lawful too! Why does my duty bid me hold
When I design no ill? What crime can I
Commit, who only strive to please? yet Heaven
Pardon my years, if you will count it Sin,
All youths have their one fault, and love is mine.

Sound there, sound louder yet your brazen notes,
Let every accent reach the Thrones above,
Stop our bright Father with repeated charms,
Let him look down, and see his sporting Son
Crowned a victorious King a mortal God.

What more could he himself have done?
From his high hopes you hurled young Gualata down,
And in exchange for Scepters, gave him chains.

My weari'd People by his chains I freed,
Africa no more shall tremble with alarms,
Nor Babes be hushed with Barnagasso's name,
Cursed be that name, more cursed my General,
Who spared his life; What hindr'ed him to have lopped
The haughty boy, and made my joys complete?
But there is a spiteful Demon haunts my rest,
Which in my greatest sweets still mingles gall,
And makes even Nectar poison to my taste.

Curse on his pleading honor say I too,
It breaks my well wrought measures, all my Arts,
And when by studied politiques I Have won
A Crown, his aerie notions idely throw
The jewel from him.

-- -- -- Had cursed Gualata died,
I needed not have feigned that lie, with which
I would delude Zaraida's heart, flattered
My love with hopes, that she despairing ere
To see him more, might cast her ey's with pity down
On me; it is true my heart, unused to shifts,
Started within me at the base design,
My Monarch Soul, disdained th'unworthy trick,
But love prevailed, and I by Proxy told
The Lie, which my own tongue refused; tell me
How did Zaraida take the news you bore?

I found her in a thoughtful posture laid,
Where nothing that but looked like joy appeared,
She list'ned carefully to the tale I told,
And ever as I mentioned Barnagasso, dropped,
A Sigh, let fall a tear, which were he dead,
Might bribe the Gods to give him back again;
With doubtful answers her fond hopes, I fed,
Till wearied with uncertainty, she begged me give
The blow, as Fate had sent it her;
But when I feigned the story of his death,
I used such apt expressions, to deceive
Her faith, that she dissolv d in tears, retired,
And told me, they were so entirely one,
She could not long be after him.

Some tribute she should pay his memory,
She loved him not at once, nor can at once
Forget the amorous play thing: but her pride
Will soon overcome her grief, she ll think on me,
And rather choose a Scepter, than a Grave.

Much I fear it! her love's too resolute.

Your Son, Zanhaga, is the fittest youth
For Court intrigues, so innocent his face,
None could suspect a Serpent in such fruit,
Then he is so faithful to his Master's trust.
That I Will employ him once more in a secret.

It Is strange he thus should praise my innocence.
Yet teach me to be false, in Childhood too.

He shall to Gualata the same story tell,
With which he first abused. Zaraida's ears?
Who knows what his despair may urge him to?

Oh it is a brave design! pursue it home,
For I shall reap the fruits of all your toil.

How soon vice creeps in each unguarded breast?
'Twas his commands that made me Villian first,
Now for my self I Am tempted to be one,
If Barnag^sso dye, my Youth, and Innocence,
May win Zaraida for my self, not him,
Whose love she hates as Hell; My Lord, the General.

Welcome my Soldier to thy Monarchs arms,
Thou faithful Prop to my declining Throne,
My grateful blood, so near a kin to yours,
Leaps, and is fired at every kind embrace,
Eager to force its banks, as who should say,
Let our divided Streams in the fame channel run.

Such gratitude, were I again to fight,
Would doubly edge my Sword, new vigor give
To every stroke, my Weapons animate
And sure to conquer Barnagasso, I
Should need it all.

You speak of this Gualata, as indeed a Man.

Or rather God, Oh had you seen him, when
Adorned with plumes, fit for the royal sports
Of War, he led his willing Squadrons on,
So gracefully in order ranged his Troops,
His beauty and his Sword were Rivals grown,
And both were deep imbrued in humane gore,
Often on those heaps which he himself had made,
He Would wishing gaze to find the hottest work,
And then like Lightening flew, to share the sport:
His men, as each were wronged with him, spurred on,
And hoped a noble harvest from this Sun,
While he, as he disdained he were not Giant born,
Mowed all around, and made a pile of dead,
On which he mounting viewed the murdering game;
Thus the defects of Nature he supplied:
But Fortune --

-- -- Cease your praise harangue no more.
But let me see this wonder of a Man.

How great he looks! he braves me in his chains!
Were he encircled round with flattering crowds,
What could he more? Can misery so glorious be?
What shall I do to bend his haughty Soul?
My Resolutions sicken at this sight,
At every look my weaker genius shrinks,
I must be gone; Zanhaga; follow me.

Is that your Emperor?

He is; the darling Substitute of Heaven.

Then Gods may be deceived as well as men,
What is he mute, to awe the common rout
To a mistaken reverence of their King,
Is he then forced
To cheat his People to obey? I pity him.

I know not what could call him hence so soon,
But Monarchs motions are above our reach.

How he betrayed his fear, when in the midst
Of peace, not dareing to proclaim a war,
He basely stole my love? he cannot repent,
A Coward never can be an honest Man.

He cannot indeed; but Jamoans brave, he scorns
To owe his safety to these Chains, they speak
Too much a Monarchs fear:

A Man to Empire born, bred up to all
That could endow a Royal Breast, yet stoop
So low as Treachery; my honest heart's
Unwilling to believed, and yet, when I
Behold my tender, charming Wife, from my
Soft bosom torn, were he yet more than King,
Were he a God, yet he is base as Hell:
You Have often mourned my fate, have pitied me,
Could you not bless me with a sight of her I love?
Methinks I Would not forego the World, till I
Had taken my leave of that Divinity,
Say, can your rigid honor grant me this?

Despair not Sir of love, or liberty,
The King, though he indulges every vice,
In loathed debauches reason quite enervated,
And in loose Riots has unmann'd his Soul,
Yet there are hours, when honor may be heard,
Such Eloquence can never plead in vain;
Believe me Sir I Will be your faithful Friend.

Oh! I believe and know thee honest, but
The King, the cursed King enjoys my Love,
He grasps her in his arms, insatiate Goat!
Even now! now! whilst I wishing stand, he gluts;
Perhaps, oh! damn th'intruding thought! h'as forced
Her to his bed; lead me, Friend, lead me now,
This hour's the best, show me where Hell and Heaven's
So near, they touch, I Will rush between, and like
A Tygress seize my robbing prey, tear out
His heart, but he has none; Oh! misery!

Compose your self, trust me the danger's less
Than you have formed it; to me he has owned,
That when refused, he has designed to force;
Some secret power has chilled his hot desires,
Nature her self, as with its Ecstasy
Surcharged, denied Compliance to his Will.

Oh Zaraida! the Power that sent thee here,
Will preserve thee, there all my hopes are placed.

Rest there secure, I have a thousand doubts
To be resolved, about this fair one's Birth;
Inform me, if she
Be old Senega's Daughter, say what Arts
He used, to make her so Divinely fair.

Oh! I will tell thee all, with the same joy
That I beheld her first, Will I repeat
The pleasing tale -- My dying Father left
Me an Infant to my Uncles care, he took
Me to his Court, where faithful Tutors did
Instruct my Youth; one day we walked abroad,
As 'twas their custom to divert my Mind,
And their harsh Precepts sweeten with delights;
There as I wantoned near the bounding Seas,
Where Africa is no more, I saw, stay! let
Me form the glorious Pageant! Now! it comes!
Like a young Prophet in's first dream of bliss,
I feel the inspiring God my fancy move;
And my returning thoughts crowd to inform my Tongue.

Such joy your words your air express methinks
I see this Sea-born Goddess mount the Waves.

The floating thing draws near rapt with the sight,
I plunge into the Flood, spite of my Guards,
And use my tender Arms as Nature taught;
And now I reach the meeting Bark, I see the fair,
Rocked by the gentle Waves afleep she lay,
A thousand graces blessed the smiling Babe,
Officious Loves about her Beauties played,
Which shoot themselves at once into my Breast:
And now I take her in my eager arms,
Like a young God I waft this Goddess over,
So light was Heavn' to Barnagasso's Arms!

Were there no Spirits to attend this Saint?
Did Heaven this Paradise ungarded leave?

Two Men there were, they dyed; the Babe was loved,
And bred by good Senega, as his Child,
For he had none. I was her Companion,
In harmless sports we often spent the day.
Till we had played each other into Love,
He blessed this flame; at last I Married her;
Yes in the face of Heaven I Married her:
A joy too great to last! For now! cursed brood!
My Subjects grown Rebellious, forced me leave
This fair, She all joy was coming to my Arms,
When cursed Tombu! but I Have done, the rest you know;
Tears must have way since she is mine no more.

Now is the time to obey our Emperor,
Sure Love and Duty can excuse one crime.

See the poor Youth at my misfortune weeps!

Who will not weep, that knows Zaraida's dead?

Dead! it is impossible; By Heavens! it is false,
Her Father Sun would be obscured by grief,
But why should he? Oh no, he will shine for joy
That she his Emanation is returned.

Thou tenderest fair! That heart indeed is
Hard, that cannot weep even Blood, for thee!

But say, for now I can hear any thing;
Inform my Soul, how did that fair one dye?

Long had our Emperor solicited in vain,
For joys, which you alone were to Possess,
Till wearied with delay, and hopless e're
To work her to comply, he laid aside
His Arts, and the bold Ravisher appeared,
Cloak'd with the veil of Love no more; resolved
To Enjoy by force, what he could never win;
But the chaste Maid snatched from his Guards a Sword,
And rather chose to dye, than live a Slave to Lust;
Who can forbear to weep at this?

Yes I will weep, but fruitless tears no more,
Large drops of liquid flame my Ey's shall pour,
The scalding deluge shall parch up my Skin,
As this consumes without, despair shall gnaw within;
But I must yet one act of justice do,
Rid at one stroke, the World, and me, of woe;
By me this lustful Royal Beast shall dye,
I Will plunge his Soul in endless Misery,
That done, I Will bask me in some open Vale,
And let her Sun my Vapor Soul exhale,
Where with Zaraida I shall happy Reign,
In bliss refined, in Pleasure free from pain;
We'll live Divinely on our Amorous fare,
And quite forget we ever Mortals were.

WHy should I Weep? Can Tears call back his Soul?
Or force mine out to him? In vain I grieve.
Where is thy Body smooth as Ebony,
And softer than the tender'st yielding Virgins skins?
Thy Limbs are undistinguished torn; thy heart,
Oh that they would pierced thee there! forgive my Wish,
That I too might have Died! no Difference now
Between the Monarch and the Slave? Yes this,
The Pile confessed thy Worth, and groaned beneath thy weight;
The Flame, thy Royal Ensign, separate burned;
Nor mixed its purer Blaze with common streams;
But proud of t's God like Load, pierced through the expanded Air:
Thou Brightest Saint, now use thy Music Speech,
Entreat my Father Sun to take me hence;
While I join with thee in such Airs Divine,
As never failed to move the listening God.

A Messenger from Hell, in stead of Heaven!
Sure I am Monstrous, that you start aside,
And leave your Angel-strains when I Appear.
Your Silence tells me, I Have been rude, disturbed
Your pious Offerings to an Earthly Saint.
It Is true, my Ears were blessed; but Heavn', till I
Had seen you too, imperfect was.

It Is base t'insult over my Religious Grief,
When Gods Afflict, Men should not add their scorn

Is it Insulting, when the Pious Votary
In hallowed Censers serves Devotion up?
If this be Scorn, then I confess I Am base
For Knees, and Tears, shall foree your pity down.

In vain, fond Youth, you plead the cause of Vice;
Such Virtue should not kneel for such a King.

Oh hear me! For my self I beg, not him,
Will Not you reward that Innocence you praise?
Why do you fly my Virgin-Touch? the Flame
Burns not so pure in Temples, as my Breast,
And like that too mine to its Heaven Aspires;
Oh stay, Coy Fair, yet stay, and hear me speak!
Even Heavn' will hear, tho it refuse to grant:
Perhaps you think me of Ignoble Stock,
And, on that Error, ground your Scorn; my Streams
From Royal Fountains flow, my Veins are rich,
And swell with pure, unmixt, Caelestial Blood.

I stay too long, my Widdow'd ears and heart,
Must never more, or hear, or think of Love.

It Is true, I Have no Crowns to lay before you,
Nor Thousand Slaves to wait my least Command;
Yet I Have a Sword shall hew you out a Throne,
Or Altar rather, for so fair a Saint;
My Brother General too will lend his Arm
Inured to Victory --

Were you in Love
You Would strive to please, and not oppose my Will;

Can nothing move your cruel Breast? yet stay,
I Have yet a Charm to lure your Heart, give me
Those Favors you can justly, grant,
And while you sing soft Airs to Barnagasso's praise,
I ll ecchoe nothing back but Barnagasso's Name;
No sound shall reach your Ears, but Barnagasso.

Rise artful Youth, thou cunning Innocence,
Thou'st stroke the darling note, my Heart revives,
Oh there is such Music in that Name! enough
To bend me from my stiff reserve; yes now
I Will think, I Will hear, nay talk of Love again;
But of a lost one! there my Woe returns!
I Have a Request, which you must not deny.

Speak, for I can deny you nothing: say
Is It in my power? already I am Winged,
Swifter than Lightning, to perform your Will.
Has any Villain wronged your Honor? say,
Though 'twere our Emperor himself, he dies:
This little Arm, guided by Avenging Heaven,
Shall Wonders do, to expiate, my former Guilt.

'Twill try your Love indeed, amongst all the Slaves;
Is there not one that knew my Husband well?
One, in whose Breast, he could repose his Griefs?
Could you find such a one, I should be blessed.

Oh I could please her beyond measure now!
What hinders then? My Duty? that I Have lost
In Pleading for my self: Can I pretend
To Love, yet harbor in my Breast a Foe
To that soft Passion? No: she shall be served:
Yes, there is such a one, so dear he was
To your Dead Lord, he knew each Thought, each Sigh:
Not Barnagasso to himself more Conscious was;
Like a True Friend, he waited him to Death,
And did the last Kind Offices perform.

May I not see him? Oh he will sooth my Grief
With Mournful Tales of Barnagasso's Death! Tell me
How often he called upon Zaraida; how,
When he lay Gasping, in his latest Breath
Zaraida pressed; you shall not deny me this.

It shall be so; the Invention pleases me;
Surprises give a relish to the Bliss;
Duty be gone, Love in my Master now;
Expect a while, and doubt not but I Will bring
The Man you most desire.

Him whom I most desire indeed; for, since
My Husband's Dead, Where can I lull my Cares
Asleep, but in that Breast himself did trust?
Ah Barnagasso! that I Would died for thee!
And yet I dare not, must not wish even that;
For were it so, yet we should have parted;
And that's the only Hell I Would shun.

Divert your Grief in these Cool Shades, you will find
Your little Jaylor's not Tyrannical.
My Duty calls me hence. Bar. Kind Youth farewell.
All are not Monsters in this Afric Court.

Oh Zaraida! Were thou as happy, as
I am wretched, I should be happy too.
Ha! Is it possible! Or do I Dream?
And speak but what I wish? Thou Brightest Vision, that
Assum'st the Lovely'st Shape on Earth, or Heaven,
Speak, and in reverence to the form you bear,
Thus bending to the Earth, my open Ears
Shall suck with greedy thirst the welcome Sounds.

It must be he! yes he himself! no Ghost!
What stays me then to undeceive us both?
Rise, Barnagasso, rise, I am your Zaraida,
Take me, and satisfy your self I Am she,
Your constant, fondest Wife.

Oh raptures too Divine!
The sudden joy over powers my Spirits depressed,
With the weight of whole Heaven, but thy kind warmth
Calls back my retiring Blood, thy Kisses breath
A Soul into thy Image, it enlivens
In my fond heart, and almost talks of Love:
Oh Zaraida, so close I ll press thee in these Arms,
All that behold, shall think I grew to thee!

Closer, yet closer to my Breast my Lord!
Each sense confesses you, my Arms that often
In amorous twines have lock d my Husband fast,
Now fall of course into their wonted place.

Oh judge not of my passion by my Words!
Those sounds are yet unknown that can express
My Bliss: My silent Exstasies declare
My Soul wrapped far beyond Tumultuous Joys;
Oh we'll repeat the life of Love, and all
Our happiness shall center in our selves.
But I am yet in th'dark what juggle has
Been played, and to what end they feigned our Deaths.

That Mystery my self alone can clear,
And first thus kneeling, I for Pardon sue
To this offended Heaven; 'twas by the Kings command
I to each other feigned your Deaths, he hoped,
That diff^rent Passions ruleing in your Breasts,
Despair in yours, and Female Pride in hers,
Something might be effected to his wish;
What caused me to unravle his designs,
And backward tread my steps, this Lady knows;
She sure will Pardon Crimes her self has caused.

And can reward the Virtues too, take all
That gratitude and best esteem can give.

Triumph! Triumph my Soul! let thy
Vast joy reach the last borders of the World,
From either side with double force rebound,
And meeting, make a Whirlpool with your Streams,
Which may suck in each heart, to joy with me;
Yet further, if it be in Nature further go;
If not, inspire even Nothing with my Joy.
Let Nothing be endu'd with Apprehension vast,
To rouse it is new formed Soul at my Alarm,
Shake off its drowsy fit, and help to push
The rolling Heaven on: What! what can be
Joy enough when my Zaraida Lives! Ring
Your Eternal Clangours for the great News,
The Goddess Lives! whom we Blasphemed with Death,
And generous honor flourishes in you.

Now for my Plot, if she be Woman, it
Succeeds. Death to my hopes! he here!

The Emperor! Then I am lost indeed!

Dye Traitor, early base, nor shall my Blood
That trickles in thy Veins, excuse this Crime,
Even that I Will Sacrifice to Love, I Will have
Thy Bowels ripped, search if thou have a Heart,
Or you are no Victim for this Deity.

Oh you will find Zaraida there! her looks
Will awe your Sacrilegious Hands, yet take
Take cruel King my Heart,
The only part of her you e're can have.

Oh for a Sword to end this Tyrants Life!
Revenge at once my Friend, and Right my Love!
Fate I accept thy gift, and thank thee thus,
Oh feeble Arm! unfit thy Masters Soul!
Or all his Guards could not have hind'red thee,
Yet I will watch a Time, when, though unarmed,
I Will seize the Blood hounds Throat, again prevented!
Gods! I submit!

Secure this Madman;
Even you his Father must confess, his Crime
Deserved the Blow I gave.

Poor Boy, his fault
Indeed was great, and yet in one so young --
But it is not fit my Frowns disclose my thoughts,
Till time afford a Season for Revenge.

Sweet Youth! how often have thou urged his suit,
With Prayers as earnest, as most Pious Souls
To their expected Heaven give, tho I,
Thy Master loathed, yet thy Devotion was,
So great, that were my Breast but capable
Of any Love, but what Gualata gave,
Thou, only thou could enter there. Ingrate!
Find now some way to satisfy his Ghost.

Consent but to be mine, and he shall live,
I Will force unravel'd Nature to disclose
Some wondrous secret, to cement his Wounds.

Too late thou vaunt'st thy Power, trust me, tho I.
Deserved my Fate, 'twas base in you to give it me:
Oh! Bear me to that Heavn' of weeping Crystal!
That Heaven! which my fond soul would never leave,
But a less loved one calls me hence farewell!

Convey him hence, such objects suit not Love,
The ruling Passion of my Breast.

Even yet rash King, your may regain your Honor,
Restore what you have unjustly taken, this Fair;
She is my due, oh* I deserve her not;
For where is the Man e're merited Divinity?
Yet since the Gods have joined our Hearts so close,
What Power dare part us now! part us! said I?
Oh Zaraida, while I Have a Hand, an Arm,
Ill never leave thee more! nay, tho my Limbs,
By some disastrous Chance, were from my Body torn,
Yet my bare amorous Trunk would kindly bend,
And make a hold for thee, some part of me
Would soon transform into a Sword, and hew
The Monster down, that durst divide our Souls.

Teach me my Lord, how to return your love,
I Have nothing new but Misery to give!

Oh thou art always ravishingly new!

How can you hug your Ruin in your Arms?
Oh shake me, shake me off! this Viper off!
Give up this Fatal Beauty to Despair,
Let me not draw your Ruin down with mine.

Cease your harsh Sounds, or I shall think you chang^d,
That would be new indeed, new Misery!

My small remains of Pity struggle now,
But Love puts in his Claim, and tears my Breast;
Teach her to yield, or me to Love no more.

I will support your honor, it shall over look
Your Lust, Gygantick grown, I Will be your Friend,
Tho often Injured, be what you should be,
And I will yet forget 'em all, forget,
If possible, you ever wronged this tender Flower.

Nay Love will plead, sure that cannot be denied;
Hear me, it is the first time I ever prayed
To you, how often have you begged this Boon
In vain? despise it not now it is given;
I will not call you Tyrant, Monster now,
No you shall be a God, and I Will adore
Your Deity, if you will grant my wish;
I ask not Kingdoms, keep them all, it is but
Gualata's Liberty and mine, forbear
To stop the peaceful Current of our Joys,
Permit us wander where our wills shall lead,
We'll seek for shelter in some Mountains Root,
Where Nature, as foreseeing our Distress,
A reverend Cave has formed; there we'll retire,
And be securely blessed with Mutual Love;
No Monarch will invade that Throne, no Arms
The quiet calm of Sacred Love disturb,
Sure you will grant me this, this, which makes me
Richer than Heaven and not Impoverishes you.

Trust me her words strike through my very Soul,
My feeble honor, reinforced by these
All conquering helps assays to lead the way;
Now all the fogs of lewd Debauches fly,
And every stenching Vapor is exhaled,
Honor alone now seems to keep the Field,
And I could almost give her up, but Love
Resumes my Heart, and drives the Usurper thence;
The Combat's hot, he fights, and now retreats,
Now Strong, now weak, and now Triumphant sits,
Proclaiming with a Tyrants Voice his ^aws;
Whilst humbled Honor, but in whispers speaks,
Give up Zaraida, ha! give what? to whom!
Zaraida to the Man I hate as Hell!
Forbid it Love! I hear not Honor now,
Like drowning Men, this was its last effort,
To rear its sinking head above the Floods,
And now it is lost for ever! ever gone!
No, your Proposal I retort to you,
Take all your Crowns, your Kingdoms, take 'em back,
But my Zaraida shall be mine!

Hold off bold sacrilegious Wretch! Tempt not
Thy Fate, lest naked as I am, some God,
Make even these hands the Ministers of Death.
Give me a Sword, be you too armed for Love;
Zaraida shall like Victory doubtful hang,
And to the Man who most deserves her fall;
Oh glorious cause! Worthy such Swords as ours;
The Day seems marked by fate for such a War!
The expecting Gods to their last limits come,
Deeply concerned for Souls so like their own;
'Twere not good manners to delay the sport
When such spectators wait; come bring the Swords,
And let the Royal Fight begin.

It Is an unequal Game, I set my Crown
To naught, sure you forget you're Prisoner here,
A Bankrupt both in honor, and Estate;
It Is not for you who at my Mercy breath,
To hope so brave a Death as from this Arm;
I scorn to lift my Sword against my Slave.

If I Am a Slave, you could not make me one.

Under my Auspices my Soldiers fought,
They servilely performed what I inspired.

Excuses never are wanting, when the will is gone;
Thus Cowards always Reason wrest,

Were I that thing, what hindered me to have forced
This Lady long e're this, and Murdered you?

Because thou art that thing, for tho 'twere base,
Yet there is a boldness in it, thou 'rt a Stranger to.

The World shall find I am not base, to Heaven,
Who best decides, this cause refer, the Priest
Shall in my Court inquire it is will, while we
Expect, to whom just Heaven this Fair will give:
Mean time free access I allow to both.
Zanhaga bid the Priest his Gods prepare.
That hint's enough this seeming Piety,
Secures their hearts whom pity might mislead:
My General too, who loves this Prince, must yield to Heaven.

If Heaven be Heaven, we shall be happy yet.

We will be happy, or in Life, or Death.

Yes, he shall Solve your Doubts, the Priest shall give
Zaraida to your Arms, but you shall n'ere
Enjoy that Gift: Gualata, and your self
Stand in my way: My Son's, my Darling's Death
Shall Not long be Unrevenged: True, I was fired;
By my Ambition, to attempt a Crown before:
But now Revenge too eggs me on his blood
Shall be the Oil to whet my blunted hopes:
I Will soon prepare the Priest to serve the King.
His Parrot-Gods shall speak but what I Teach,
And my own Thoughts his Prattling Demons Preach.

THus far has Love unbounded hurried me!
The rapid Flood breaks through opposing Dams,
Bears down each Fence, that dares dispute its way;
All Disappointments but increase its force;
Each blow new Vigor gives each fall
Infuses fresh Recruits to every part,
Tenacious of his hold he hugs me close;
Whilst smothered honor struggles but in vain,
Shall I be forced to mortify my flame:
Because some servile Priests has joined their hands,
What tho her folly too unites their hearts,
My Priest shall straight untye this Mystic Knot,
And make even Heaven repeal its former Act.
What ho! within there! Marabou! come forth,
And ease a Monarch's Breast.

You have your Cue! be faithful to your Trust,
And your Reward shall far exceed desire.

Behold you who the Heavenly secret know,
Behold me both a Monarch, and a Slave;
I to whose Nod all Africa submit,
Can stoop to kneel at a weak Woman's feet:
She, though a Captive, scorns to look on me,
My very Crown's a Bawble in her eyes;
Too poor to play with, whilst the Captive Prince,
Though robbed of all his Glories, gluts in Joys,
Which but to taste, my self would be Dethroned:
And I had plucked ere this the unwilling Rose,
But some remaining dregs of honor hindered me;
This is the Plague torments your Monarch's Soul,
Now see if Hell or Heaven afford a Cure.

ARise ye Fiends of Hell! arise;
You who for freedom groan,
Who long lost Earth, bemoan;
Come, with fresh Objects, feed your eyes;
You, who for Sins on Earth, are bound
To Swim in Coldest, Streams;
Still dying, never Dead are found;
Come, warm you by my Flames:
I Will Chafe you till you are happy too;
I Will Thaw your Blood if it Congeale
I Will mend your blue and bleaky hue;
Your skin, tho chopp'd, and scarr'd I Will heal.
The cutting Winds, that Whistling blow
From dazzling Mountains of driven Snow,
Shall cease their Orders, to obey,
If you will prepare, and come away.

Come to our Monarch, give Advice, Arise ye Fiends of Hell! arise.

WE come! we come, Great Marabou!
We watch thy pleasing Call;
Our stiff'ned Joints are supple now,
You warm the coldest Hell.

If Love disturb this Monarch's Breast,
It Is fit he should enjoy
What e're can please the unruly Guest,
And force her if she fly.

Gualata Dead, she will yield of course,
Dull Lovers we despise;
She but expects the pleasing force,
To give down all her Joys.
My Lover was for Piety,
Conscience, and Loved waged Wars;
His coldness Damned himself, and me;
Or we had both been Stars.

Behold me once a Mortal Wight,
In an Old Beldain's Arms;
For Love of Gold I drudg'd all Night,
And rose at all Alarms:
But yet 'twas cold! 'twas coldly done!
Nor did it ought avail;
Then force the young, the fair, nor run
The Risque to freeze in Hell.

I to an Aged Fool did Charm,
Who only hugged me close;
My Maidenhead in Hell cannot warm,
Nor Virtue-heat infuse.

Then force the Fair, nor longer crave,
But let Gualata die:
By this your self, and her, you will save,
From Winters Misery.

For they who quenched their amorous flames,
Are Damned to Freeze in Coldest Streams.

HEar! you in Heavens blue Regions, hear!
You who have once been Men;
And for your Virtues swim in Air,
To make my Phoebus train.
How happy you! warmed by his Beams,
Your Balls of Fire ye Guard;
Each Spirit guides his Orb of Flames,
Proud of his hot reward.
You who have obeyed Almighty Love,
Inured to Amorous Wars,
For which in Flames you wanton rove,
Pleased with your Subject Stars;
You who prefix each Mortals Doom,
And know each Miscreants Fate:
Say, will ye cut the Prisoners Loom,
Or give a longer Da'e?

Come, come relate,
The Captives Fate,
Or Life, or Death,
Bring in a Breath;
If Love must yield,
And quit the Field,
Or Beauty Bend.
Descend! ye Lords of Air, descend!
Descend in a Machine to proper Music, 4 Heavenly Spirits.

YOur Crown's not safe if he should Live,
The God's are unappeas'd,
His Blood's our due; in vain you strive,
With Blood alone we are pleased.

For you the Sun has sent her here,
Destroy the Prince, and force the Fair.
Say, Hell, Shall it be so?
Yes, Wee're for it below;

We above are for it too.

Well then it must be so;
What Mortal can withstand
What Heaven and Hell command?

Then must Gualata dye?

Yes Gualata must dye.

And must Zaraida yield?

Yes Zaraida must yield.

What if she should deny?

Then force her to comply.

It shall be so, I love to see the Gods
Jocose, a sign they are pleas d to serve my Love:
The Captive King shall dye, as fate Commands;
And what my Father sent me shall be mine.

It Is fit your Majesty should please your self.

Is it so Father? but you're mine no more,
My Soul disdams to pay my Bodies Debt.

Good Heavens! what make he straggling here uncalled?

Uncalled indeed by thee, as were all Spirits else,
For since your own can serve, why should you trouble us?
Thy cheat's too gross, to pass on Heavenly Minds
Scarce had I past the lagging hindmost Stars,
When lo our Mighty God my Voyage stop;
My Priest, said he, forgetting all respect
To Right, preferring present Gold to future Heaven,
Reverses my decrees, and wrests my Will,
Divides those hearts I Have joined and takes the fair
From Barnagasso, whom my Soul admires;
Have! to my loved Gualata have, thence hie,
And to the Emperor declare my Will,
Tell him the Fair must be Gualata's Wife:
Thus spoke the God, I all Obedience flew,
And now my Soul is eager to return,
I must be gone, resolve to obey, or dye.

Poor superstitious Boy! Pri. O that my Charms
Could bind his Soul in Hell for this affront.

This Boy has shocked my Soul, in vain I love,
If Heaven oppose, in vain are all my Arts:
And yet, for he was Treacherous on Earth,
Perhaps he but deceives me now; the Priest
Sings most melodious to my Ears, his Voice
Like a deluding Siren leads me on,
Avert the Omen Heaven! but this is true,
This I am sures a Ghost, the Boy I killed,
Whom thwarted Heaven has on this errand sent,
The others are but counterfeited shapes,
Spirits too complaisant to cross my Will;
But shall I loose her for a Childish Ghost?
Her whom I love? No, it is fixed, this Night
I Will grasp the Fair; how then shall Heavn' be served?
As far as Love permits I will obey;
Go tell the Prince what Fate commands, yet that
My Mercy interceeds, if he will yield her mine.
That part of the Oracle, his Life, I Will spare;
If not, this night he must submit to Fate.

How happy my Zaraida are we! thus --
Beloved of Heaven, when Guardian Spirits watch,
And Gods grow careful of our lives? what harm
Can hurt us now, since they detect the cheat?
Let Priests damn on, kind Heaven will ward the blow.

All their masked Spirits are impostours found,
Their mystic clew kind Heaven untwists, the youth,
How wisely Heaven appoints its Instruments!
Who served us when alive, serves us in death.
Oh we will gratefully our Tribute pay,
Or Crowned, or Chained, we will Religious be,
But did this Messenger no more disclose?

He seemed to hope, yet doubted Fates decree,
He bade me be my self, in all Distress,
Let Honor lead my thoughts, he said no more,
Nor needed he. This was advice enough,
Fear not my Love, no power can part us now,
Hell dare not, and sure Heaven will never change.

Here comes one will endeavor it,

Well how has Heaven disposed of me? am I
To live or dye? Say thou Ambassador.

It Is true, both Hell, and Heaven, have marked you dead,
Nay have required it, as the only means
To save our selves, but yet our gracious King,
Unused to Cruelty, dares to offend
On Mercy's side, and mitigate your Doom.
Thus says our Monarch, if the Fair will yield,
I will Restore your Crowns, and be your Friend;
Nor think this hard, since Fate designed her mine,
And asks your Life for your Presumptious Love:
But that he spares, demanding only her.

Can he at once both give, and take my Life?
Thinks he the Body lives without the Soul?
Hence Trifler, with thy self-refuting speech;
But say, was it not fear extorted this,
Which now you lay on Mercy? was there not
A Boy, who gave the lie to your false Oracles?
A most unwelcome Guest at your repast?

Since you misconstrue thus my Masters Love,
Hear what his Mercy when Rejected can;
Tho Heaven it self should justify your claim,
He Would still go on, and force her to his Bed.
Lay hold on Mercy e're it be too late;
Or she must yield this Night, or you must dye.

Where! where is the King! my tears shall bend his mind,
Oh I will do what honor can permit,
To save my Dear, my Barnagasso's like,

Is it then possible you will leave me thus?

You are unkind my Lord to mention it.

Stay then, and bear with me what Heaven appoints;
Back to your King, this answer give, tell him
He knows me not, or he had spared his gift,
I can as bravely spurn those Lands, as he can give:
As for Zaraida, tell him naught of her,
Lest he should think I could be so debased,
As but to? ve asked my self, to part with her.
Alas! tho in a Storm, we often throw
The nearest Jewel over, we still preserve our selves.
And what art thou but my immediate self?
Go, tell thy Master, I Am prepared for Fate;
Yes I will dye, but how, is yet to be resolved.

The manner of your Death's not much to me,
So you but dye; I thrist not after Blood,
But as a servile ladder to my hopes,
Which I have now infallibly disposed,
And shall by night have reached the top, what now
Remains since you're secure, but Jamoans life?
That taken, each Loyal head shall straight be lopped,
I Will throw this Rubbish in to drink their Blood,
Lest as Fools say, my Throne should slippery be;
This Mortar shall cement my walls, not Blood
Of Bulls more sure, Fate prosper this design,
And Victims Blood shall make your Altars shine.

IF Death but ends Despair, why all this noise?
Were it indeed to cease to be, to leave
This gaudy something, be resolved to nough?
Yet were it better than unhappy life.
He, who enjoys a pleasing Privacy,
We count most Blessed, because he is at quiet there?
And what is quiet, but the next degree
To naught? but one step further, there is nothing.
Nothing is quiet in Perfection.
A voice! Zaraida sings our Elegies!
I Will listen to her Airs, but I should not,
For they are so sweet, they will draw me from my thoughts
Of Death, and charm me back to Life again.
Ease with soft Sleep your weary Eyes,
Refresh your Spirits till you rise,
While Music shall your dreams surprise.
To me your fatal Birth is due,
Doomed by that God you never knew.
To dye on Seas, where you were Tossed,
And thrown on Sooty Africk's Coast,
Where falsely you to Creatures pray,
And leave that God, your God's obey:
Give not so soon to the hungry Grave,
That Beauty he profusely gave:
It Is brave to bear with Misery,
Break not his Laws, nor strive to dye,
When he sees fit, he will set you free.

How strange her Fancy works! What Fear suggests!
Death seems too dreadful to her tender years!
I Will bear me, to relieve her troubled thoughts.

Stop not your Airs, blessed Shade! yet if you must,
Go tell Gualata, that we must not Dye*

What fast Asleep! she is gone to rest t'inure
Her thoughts to Death; How Beautiful she lies!
And feeds each Sense with exquisite delights!
Oh she has a continued round of Joys!
Which sharpen, not abate desire; Why Heaven!
Why was this sweetest Beauty wretched made?
Oh! that some pitying God would seal my Eyes
With hers! be both for ever, ever sealed!
How sweet she breaths! I Will catch the blessed perfume,
And with soft Kisses I Will awake my Fair.

Where! Where! my Barganasso, Where am I?

Oh you are in a tender Husbands Arms!

There hold me, till I have recovered strength.
To tell you how I have labored in my Sleep.
When I had left you full resolved on Death,
My Senses frighted at the leap you meant,
Here I retired, to ease my burdened Mind,
Expecting you; Sleep scarce had closed my Eyes,
When a Pale Ghost appeared, and Sung such Airs,
As both Instructed, and Delighted too.

I heard a Voice, my Love, and thought 'twas yours,
Such Harmony is in your Thoughts, and Words,
That Music comes unfelt from both, in Dreams
You Chant such Airs, as Charm the Drowsy'st Dead.

How could I Dream of what I never thought?
My Soul was gone to rest, had left to think,
Even thought it self was wearied into sleep;
It was no Dream caused by unsetl'd Thoughts,
How could I think of what I never knew?
My Lord; it was a Ghost, the unknown God
Forbids our deaths, you cannot, must not dye.

That proves it but a Dream, the Child of Fear,
You formed the danger great, for succor flew
To Thoughts extravagantly wild and gross.
Is there a God above our Glorious Sun?
The mighty Deity now jealous grown,
Checks the rude Question; Oh my Zaraida!
Let not our crimes draw down more thunderbolts,
And yet, forgive me Heaven! I wish we could:
But be they such, as end at once, not Plagues
That lingering, keep us cruelly alive!

What is it your despair would urge you to?

I would secure my self, and you from shame:
The lustful King, backed by the Cunning Priest,
Prepares for Force; How can you bear the thought of this?

Oh never, never! I Will be only yours.

I know you would dye e're think of change, but power
Too weakly answers to our will; his Slaves
Are trained to Rapes, perhaps I too must view
The deed, if mortal eyes can bear what would
Deprive the Sun himself of sight; Oh Heavens!
If there be yet a way to save my Love,
Show it me, point it out to my dark Soul,
For Humane Wisdom's at a loss to help us.

Trust Heaven, that sure will guard my Innocence.

It Is too presumptious to lie down at ease,
And leave the Gods to work our freedom out;
No: let us employ the little time we have
To live, in searching after death; for death's
The only means can save us now; enclosed
By miseries, on every side besieged.
In vain I search, no Nook, no Cranny's found,
No passage left unguarded to escape, but death.
Prepare, my fairest Love, for we must dye:
Oh that so sweet a thing should want a Name
That Is soft enough, t'express how sweet it is!

I Am ever your obedient Wife; but death's
So terrible, it shakes my heart, yet worse,
Much worse 'twould be to part; How must we dye?

Some death that is quick, for I expect with fear,
Each moment, when they will force thee from my Arms:
Our Minutes are as dear as Miser's Gold;
We have not time to starve our Souls away,
Hell will o retake us ere that is done; but hold!
Here Is one says he is my Friend, if he speak true,
He Will not deny the Passport which I want.

Forgive my abseuce, which my place required,
I Have heard what cheats were used in th'Oracle,
And fearing the effects of just despair;
I Am come to bid you think of Life, of Love;
In spite of Priests you shall be great again.

I Laugh to see you shoot so wide of the mark;
Yet if you mean by bravely dying, to be great,
I Am yours; no Priest indeed can hinder that.

No, you shall live; blessed both with liberty and love.

Perhaps my Father's heard my earnest Prayer,
And sends thee to point out a way to live.
Speak, if I can have honorable Life,
I must not dye, death would be a rashness then,
Much unbecoming Barnagasso's Soul.

Know then, in Tombu, ther'es a Law, preserved
These many years by Sacred care, enrolled
By the First King e're wore the Imperial Crown,
By this, the General who Victorious comes
From Foreign Wars, is Priviledg'd to Ask,
What his extremest wishes prompt him to,
Even to the Crown h'as won.

Are these your mighty hopes? credulous Man!
Why did thou sound so brave a Charge, to raise
My Spirits high with expectation vast;
Then sink 'em down, unable to sustain their weight?
Think thou a Law can bar his hot desires?
He, who can trample on Divine Commands,
May safely break such Mothy Bonds as these.

Still has it been inviolable kept:
With fresh repeated Oaths he Swore, to grant,
What e're Ambition, with red Victory flusht,
Could Ask, if I would Lead his Armies on.

You Argue weaker still; so lame his Oaths
Observed; he would sooner keep another Man's.

But it is his Interest That will go far;
He knows the Soldiers are at my Command,
Prone to resent my injuries, as their own;
What though he is amorous, he loves his Crown
Too well, to lose it for a moments sport.

That argument I confess were strong,
For Fear works wonders, had he not such helps,
As never can fail to buoy his Spirits up,
A Statesman, burning Lust, and a damned Priest,
If he is a Coward spite of these, it is strange.
Oh! I Have considered well whatever looked
The least resembling hope, and find no Ground
To Anchor in, but Death, immediate Death.

What shall I do to save so brave a Man?

Give me a Sword, dissuade me not from Death,
When life's a burden grown, think not I Would dye,
If I could live as Barnagasso should.
If you're my Friend, as I can hardly doubt;
Relieve my wants, and charitably help
To end that Life, which I cannot preserve.

Defer it but a moment more, till I
Can sound the King, then if I fail, it is time
Enough to dye, a minute is not much,

Should I let slip this moment Heaven affords,
Perhaps, why do I say perhaps? I Am sure
'Twill never, never come again.

Nay now my Lord you're too unjust to me,
And to your self, to slight so great a boon;
Despair when there is room for Hope, is mean,
And what is mean, can never enter here;
Death is unlawful, as you said your self,
While life can honorably be preserved;
Come we will join our Forces, and entreat
A short Reprieve, can you deny your Wife?

Can you deny your Friend, who begs you Live?

My Lord I Am not acquainted yet with death,
Stay but an hour, you will not leave me sure.

How can you need such Courtship to your Life,
And to a happy one, if Heaven can make it so?

We conquer, see he yields! he melts apace!

Do with me what you please, but much I fear;

What my Lord?

That we shall live to Curse this weak neglect.

Did he so haughtily reject my Gift?

He bad me say he was prepared for Fate.

Then Fate shall be prepared for him; or false,
Or true, the Oracle shall now take place.
Away repenting thoughts! Remorse avaunt,
Methinks I see his Soul already winged;
Bring me the Royal Bowl, Zanhaga, quick,
I Will drink its happy Voyage through The Air.

And Ill drink yours; now Fate you are kind indeed.

This it is to be a King, and fortunate:
Were I Gualata now, I were to die.

And were I either of you, so were I.

Come, give it me, Ill drink this Health, tho death
Were mixed inseparably with the Draught.

That would not I, though Heaven should follow it,
If Poison causes Death, he guesses well;
However, there is no Robbery, he gets a Star,
And I his Crown, he is pleased, and so am I.

Zanhaga, I forgot, you should have drank of mine.

My Lord, this Bowl is rich enough for me.
How wondrous kind he is! Now I am great --
Gualato, Tombu, are my own;
And all by Wit, by Politics refined;
How I could hug my self! and how applaud
That brave ambition, which has urged me on!

Come my Zanhaga, it is not fit Death wait,
Love calls upon me to destroy this King,
And reap from thence what Love, and Beauty bring.
As they are going out, the General enters and stops 'em.

I beg your Majesty to hear my suit.

What is it Barsiloa? speak, I Will hear.

It Is in behalf of the whole Empire, of
Your self, to punish whom the Gods would change
The course of Nature, rain cold Winter down,
A freezing Hell on scorching Africa,
If Blood so Innocent be rashly spilt.

What tends it that way then?

I beg the gallant Pris^ner may be freed,
And his fair Wife given to her Husbands arms.

Why ask'st thou not my Crown? as well thou may,
And sooner should succeed, proud insolence!
Dare thou oppose thy self to me, and Heaven,
Who has required his Death, and Doomed her mine?
Away, I Will hear no more such suits; lead on.

My Lord, it is what our Laws allow; my self
Who made 'em Slaves, now beg they may be free.

Those Laws one King has made, another may Revoke:
Zanhaga, sure this cannot be your Son!

I know not if he be my Son; a few
Hours more and he shall be my Slave.

You cannot but know the forgeries of the Priest,
His cursed abuse of Sacred Rites inflames
All Africa with a Pious Rage; if he
Must dye; twere better far, you tell the World
The true, the only cause; say he is the rub
To your ho^ ^ust: Proclaim in Tombu's Streets,
Gualata dies, that you may act the Beast
Securely with his Wife; this would be great,
Tho wicked, yet it is better than to skulk
Behind a poor pretense of Fates commands,
Which you your self have countenanced the Priest
To forge; there is some Virtue in a bold
Attempt, but a mean action adds that sin
To Cruelty, and dwindles you to nothing straight.

Oh Love! how poor a God art thou! whose chains
So much debase whom they Subject, my Slave
Sees in my Face my heart, and braves me now.

My Lord it is time Fates orders were obeyed,

I thank thee, thou have rowz'd Revenge, and Love,
My Thunder first shall crush this Prince, then you.

It Is not big words can fright your General,
Have you forgot? -- Stay Sir, when first the War
Broke out, when Gualata all Revengeful flew,
To right his injured Honor, and his Love?
Remember Sir what fears your Army seized,
-- Even you your self,
Who now can Thunder, trembled then; not Flags
By Winds more moved; you almost shook your Soul away.
What had become of your bravados then,
Had I not undertook the desperate charge?
Kind Prayers, and tears were paid me then,
I thought 'em true, cursed fool! I did -- I lead
Your Troops, where I Have unfortunately won,
Conquered the best of Men, have chained a God.
For such is Barnagasso to our World,
And now to be denied the common right;
Is base, and I return ingrate to you.

Audacious Villian! hence! Blaspheme no more
With thy vile Tongue my Sacred Majesty;
But that thy Fathers Services now plead
Aloud, my Royal Blood too, which thou shar'st,
For Mercy begs, thou Traitor had been dead;
Loath too I am t'imbrue my hands afresh,
In the same Purple Flood I spilt this day;
A thousand things now force me t'excuse thee,
The time calls on me for a nobler act,
To glut in Blood of Kings, not Slaves; yet e're
I go, to give the aspiring Soul some check;
I spurn thee Traitor from my presence thus.

Is that to check; thou art in love indeed!
Have I for this endured the Toyls of War,
Left a Luxurious Court for a rough Camp?
Forced my just heart to fight for Lust, my Soul
To sweat and drudge to pamper him for Rapes?
And am I spurned at last for my Reward?
My slighted wounds gape in their Masters face,
Revenge, revenge, they cry -- I Will right my self
By force, my forming brain chalks out the way
Which I must tread -- have then e're it is too late,
To right thy self, and to prevent his Fate.

OH spare him! spare him! spare my Husband's Life,
His Blood cannot make you Beautiful to me,
'Twill paint you worse than horrid Monsters are,
Why will you kill him then? O cruel King!
Is that the way to Love? because he is mine,
He dies, how can I love his Murderer?
My Eyes are weak, they cannot look on Blood,
That color makes me weep: my Heart's so soft,
Like our quick plant from a rude touch it flies,
But kindly opens to the gentle hand;
More mercy, and less Blood might do much more;
Oh! I d say any thing to save his Life;
Which I have brought to such a shameful Death;
Oh could we now but dye with Honor, I were blessed?

Forgive me love, if I reproach thee now,
My Friend too who dissuaded me from Death;
See what your prayers have done, I was unjust
When I would end this miserable Life;
Oh my Prophetic fears are true! 'twas once
My own to dye, the happy minute fled
Unheeded by, the slighted Friend will never return.
Now lead me where you please, to death, which never
Can come too soon to a wise man; lead on.

Why have you so my Lord? Death is not slow
To come, can you leave me for death?

My Love admits of no delay, speak Fair,
Accept my flame, and he shall live, live great;
But for your self, good Gods! the Earth shall groan,
Millions of Slaves shall sweat in her rich veins,
Slaves who are born, and dye in Golden Mines;
Their every stroke shall cleave an Empire forth,
The rough formed ^ass shall loose it is close embrace,
The Embryo Gold shall from the Womb be torn,
And shall by curious art be formed a new,
By prayers, or force, I will enjoy your charms.

Vain Promises! you ask so high a price,
The Universe's now worth what I must give.

Vain Promises! you ask so high a price,
The Universe's now worth what I must give.

Spare all thy tears, Zaraida spare thy sighs,
My life's not worth the Ransom he requires.

Oh cruel King are you a Man, yet bear
Unmov d what bent the stormy Winds and Seas?
My face alone could calm their Rage; but now
Nor that, nor tears, nor sighs, can move your Breast.
My voice has lost it is sweetness now, Oh call
The Winds and Waves, call them not cruel now,
No more be they accursed, for they were kind,
Much kinder than the cursed Monster Man.

It Is you are cruel now, curse on it! I could
Force her Love, but then I Have imperfect joy.
-- -- -- Have you thought?

Yes I have thought.

And what is the result?

That if one crime can sink a Soul to Hell,
Where will thy World of Murders hurry thee?

To Heaven poor fool, where should great Jamoan go?

What for Murder?

Ask thy self that; if common Murder sinks,
Where must thou go, whose hands are dipped
In a fond Husbands Blood?

Why do thou sport Almighty justice thus?
Think thou such slight evasions weigh with Heaven?

If they weigh here, I look no further.
How can you call me cruel? yet endure
Your Husbands limbs by drawing Engines stretched,
His Veins drawn fine as silken wefts;
His Blood inflamed by journeyi^^ on, now finds.
A longer course renewed, and now it is dams
Broke down, irregularly runs, forced up
To the last limits of that little world,
It under dies the white with scarlet streakes;
The snowy Corpse blushes at the disgrace;
Can you bear this without reluctance!

Oh do you know so well the pains of the rack,
And yet can cruelly design him there

And now he curses Heaven, that made him young,
For life in youth is rivetted more close
To the Inwrapping Flesh.
Now he roars loud with more than Lions rage,
And now he flings his Body forward on
The rack, provoking Death, who bears his taunts,
And servilely attends my nod, O life!
Wretched indeed, when Death, so terrible
To Humane thoughts, is languish'd for!

Were it yet more wretched, I have a Soul
To bear it all, cease then to threat, and do.

The burning Vessel now boyls over, he foams,
And froths at mouth, he struggles with the choking stench;
His Eye Balls strained crack their suspending threads,
And from their splinter'd jaggy roots a deluge flows.
Nature quite tired with passion, raves no more;
Yet still the Body huggs the unwilling Soul,
In fond Embraces locks the Spirit fast,
Thristing for Separation; Can you be
Yet unmoved at this description? Alas!
You little know the thousand pains he bears.

O Gualata! Now I feel, I fear for you,
My Female-Courage trembles at the thoughts;
Yet I Will not shrink a jot from Virtues Rules,
Nor give this Beauty to that Tyrants Arms,
Tho at my first Embrace, thy pains should cease.

Where are ye Gods if the loud fall of two
Such mighty wrecking Orbs cannot rouse your souls?
Awake, nor let a Mortal brave ye thus.

Think, Can you bear to see him piecemeal torn?
His angry flesh wrench'd from the unwilling bones?
His Bowels ripped, while Life yet shivers there?
His big heart, dancing in a Sea of Blood,
Shall first be mash'd, then thrown into his Face.

I cannot think it, thought startles at it.

I Will aid your barren Imagination;
I Will lead you, where your eyes shall straight behold
That horror, which your lagging fancy could not reach.

Hold! hold! tho all your arts cannot make me yield,
I Have heard enough to dye! farewell!

That thou were dead indeed! there all my fears
Would end; the weary Soul retires for ease.

By Heavens a lucky opportunity!
Bear her to the Royal Bed, and him to Death.

Oh stay! no power shall force me hence, till she
Revive, Zaraida! Curse on my weak Voice!
Why was it not loud as Whirl-winds, Tempests roar?
Oh that my Chains could ring a loud alarm.
To wake the sleeping Gods and her! Where Father! where!
Oh that my Teeth, my Nails could straitway dig
Quite through this Globe, to find the wandering God!
What shall I do to save her from his Lust?
I Will wake, or crush her Soul out with my weight.

Oh Barnagasso! Am I once more here!
Thus let my Kisses breath my Soul into
Your Body, that we may together dye.

Oh Love! nor Hell, nor Heaven shall part us now.

Then Earth shall; Guards force her from him, or Racks
Unheard of be your Fate -- unbind him first;
Then force her from her hold.

Now I am loose, no Power shall bind my Hands again.

Curse on my Dalliance it has ruined all!

See King, my Fate is now my own; but I
Will live, live to revenge my self, by Heavens!
It Is ominous, it is the first time I ve grasped
A Manly Sword this day, this age of Slavery.

This comes of slipping, when occasion serves,
How e're I Am sure of him, tho the other lives.

See how amazed the Cowards look! seize him.

Come on, I shall at least dye nobly now.

What Noise is that?

Fly, Sacred Sir preserve your Life;
The General enraged at his Repulse,
Has, with a Rebell's Fury, forced our Gates,
None dare oppose; my self but hardly escaped
The rolling Flood, to warn you of the War.

Oh my brave Friend! How have I wronged thy honesty*

In vain is Flight; I must sustain the shock.

Fall on, fall on; I have not time to Embrace
Thee now, anon I shall; let us dispatch.

Come, Love, inspire my Heart, while I engage
This Emperor! cruel; and Coward too!

Ha! they have played me foul; I feel, besides
My Wounds, a Murdering Enemy within:
The boiling Caldron roars, barb'd Irons prick
My tender'st part; bear me to the Briny-Flood,
There let me plunge this Flaxen Taper down;
Wade through the dark Abyss to quench my Blaze.

Help me to bear him up.

Wide, wide Earth! burst open thy chilling womb!
In thy cold Cisterns let me bathe my Flame;
Build me a Throne in Aquilunda's Pool;
Turn here the Zaira's course, I Will gape awide,
Through me it is Channel lies; it shall come forth
Swift liquid Flame, painted with my Hearts-blood.

Trust me, I weep to see my Master thus.

That I could cleave to Hell! dig in rich Mines.
Of Winter! I Would feed on Cakes of Ice.
The Subterranean Field should hiss, should slame,
Even Snow should burn; so catching is my Plague!
Off! I Will to Hell, the happyest Heaven is Hell.

How cold he feels: Emp. I have my wish, I freeze.
But here Zaraida comes, 'st not a word;
She takes me for her Lord; Who is it dares hold me?
Barnagasso here! Dye fond Fool.
Now I Am King again! let Trumpets sound!
For Mighty Jamoan, Great Tombu, Lives.
Ha! What have thou done! Kill d thy best Friends.

Mourn not, for I Have been beforehand with you:
Know, 'twas I Poisoned you to gain your Crown:
I Bribed the Priest, to give the Prisoner Death,
That I might wear a Triple Diadem.
I cannot repent, were it to do again,
And the Temptation half so fair, I Would do it.
Make have, you cannot live,
I Will wait rhee at the Portal.

I shall o'rtake thee e're thou fly'st so far;
Cursed Zanhaga! my Blood will weigh thee down:
Oh Love! prepare my Starry Throne;
My Soul is winged, and as my Body sinks, she mounts.

This way th'astonish'd King retired; behold
Triumphant Death! How were these murders done?

The King was Poisoned, as Zanhaga, e're
His Death Confessed, by him, he too had bribed
The Priest to speak your Fate; the King deprived
Of Reason, by the Operating Draught,
Mistaking him for you, destroyed him.

They should have fallen by me alone, but I
Submit to the Will of Heaven, take hence the Dead.
I cannot, must not pity 'em, and it is
Not in my Nature to Insult, to you
Who with your timely aid maintained what I
Begun, I give my Thanks in this Embrace,
And, as the next of Blood, salute you Tombu's King.

It Is in your Love I glory more, than in
My Crown, which so ignobly does descend;
My Fathers crimes have made me great; I fought
Not to be King, but to relieve so brave
A Man, to be your Friend, I Have not deserved
That Name, yet I Will assume it thus.

'Twere vain to offer at a payment of
Our debts to Heaven, which had reduced us to
The worst Extremes, and snatched us thence to joys
Unthought of, unexpected bliss; Heaven has
Appeared so partial for our good, that 'twere
A Sin to doubt its further care; even our
Misfortunes seem but the kind Trials of
A pious mind, our grief, a purging flame;
And now all Innocent we'll live, most blessed.

Most blessed indeed in my Zaraida's Love,
What wonders were for our Deliverance wrought!
Let none hereafter at misfortunes pine,
Let none despair, that hear our story told;
Let each unhappy Man his Misery
With patience bear, for Heaven at last will set him Free.


