LOVE LOST IN THE DARK; OR, THE Drunken Couple.

ACTED AT NEW MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, Dan. Major at the Hand and Scepter over against S. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1680

MAdam Muggulla, you most joyfully are met to pleasure me.


It may be so; I used to pleasure many: here lies my way; I do beseech you,
Sir, keep your own Voyage


Nay, be not so short, I must with you.


With me! I pray Sir; what, what Sir, do you see in me?


Do not mistake me, dear Beauty, nothing but honesty in faith.


Hang honesty, Trump not me up with honesty: do you mark Sir, I have a charge,
and a special charge Sir, and it is not honesty can win on me Sir


Prithee conceive me rightly.


I conceive you.


But understand.


I will not understand, I cannot, nor I do not understand.


But prithee Muggulla, let my young Master Camillo see thy Mistress; but look
upon her, and do you stand by


How Is this? shall I stand by? what do you think of me? Now by the virtue of
the place I hold, you are a paltry Squire to tempt my trust thus; I am no Helen
to be defloured of my Loyalty, by your fair language


You mistake me still.


It may be my place will bear me out in it, and will mistake you still, make
your best on it. Call. A Pox upon you, let him but have a glance at her


The Devil's in you, he shall never see her.


This is a Croan in grain; thou art so testy, prithee take breath, and know thy
friends


I will not: I have no friends, nor will I have any this way: but now I call to
mind, why will he see her


Because she loves him woundily, and he loves her totally.


She hates him damnably, most wickedly, take that upon my word, and swears her
eyes are sick when they see him: how fearfully have I heard her rail against
him, and cast, and rail again? call for hot waters, and then rail again


I Will believe a Witch that has been nine years dead, before this.


I have heard her swear, that he is the beastliest man: what a grief must this
be? Sir-reverence of the Company, a rank Whoremaster, ten Livery Whores, she
assured me on her Credit, with weeping eyes she spoke it, and seven Citizens
Wives, besides all Volunteers that serve under him, and of all Countries


The Devil never fathered such a Lie.


Besides, he is so careless of his body, which is a foul fault in him.


Come, leave fooling, it is a mere Fable drawn from thy Ancient Virtues; may be
it is her Maid is angry with him, because he wooed her with his Honor; and you
mistake


She hates him very well too, but her Mistress hates him heartily: Look upon
him! on my Conscience she would see the Devil first, with eyes as big as
Saucers; when I but named him, she lept back thirty foot


That Is a lie by five and twenty.


If once she smell him, (for certainly he is rank, she says extreme rank, and
the wind stands with him so) she is gone for ever


For all this he shall see her, and give her such a heat, that the Hoegoe of
her Constitution shall perfume his Chamber for two long hours after


Has he any new eyes when those are scratcht out, or a Nose to clap on warm? Is
he proof against a Piss-pot? which if they bid me, I must throw upon him


Well then, a Devil take you, he shall not see her.


His Dam coddle you for his Supper, if he do.


Then be so far his friend, good parch'd-handed Muggulla, as to give her this
Letter, and leave thy pleasant lying, or leave it in her Pocket, there is no
harm in it, do it, and I Will take thee up a Petticoat


Take up my Petticoat, I scorn the motion, I scorn it with my heels, take up my
Petticoat


And so hot, Reverent Muggull.


Sir, you shall find me hotter, if you take up my Petticoat.


I Will give you a new Petticoat.


I scorn your gift, give your Masters old Boots, you give a Petticoat: Alas,
you are too young Sir, you are too young to circumcize me that way; take up my
Petticoat, I am a woman, a Gentlewoman, a woman of another way; he that takes
up my Petticoat, shall have enough to do I warrant him; I would sain see the
proudest of you all dare to do it


Still mistakes: what a Pox do you look at the wrong end of the Prospective
Glass


Petticoat! you show now what you are; but do your worst Sir.


A Wildfire take thee, what ails thee?


I ask no favor of you, and so I leave you; and withal, I charge you in my
own name; for I would have you know, that in this place I represent my Ladies
Person


The Devil could not have picked out such a Representative.


Upon your life do not dare to follow me; for if you do, I know you have a
standing that way: but if you do, look to it, look to it.


Go, and the Pox go with thee, if thou have so much moisture as to receive it;
for thou will have 'um, though a Horse bestow'um; I must devise a way, for he
must see her, and very suddenly; and Madam Petticoat, it all the wit I have,
and this can do, I Will make you sell your charge and your place. But here they
come


I know I wrong my modesty.


And wrong me in being so importunate, for that I neither can nor must grant.


A hard sentence from him, I have chosen my Judge: Alas Sir, did I approach you
with unchaste Desires, a sullied Reputation, or were deformed, as it may be I
am, though many affirm I am something more than handsome


I dare swear it.


Or if I were no Gentlewoman, and breed courtesy, you might with some pretense
of reason slight what you should sue for


I Am sure I should; the Fleas are cursed troublesome: Hey day! there is a Legion
of young Cupids in my Breeches


Pray Sir, name my defects; when once convinced, I trouble you no further.


Then I will bluntly and truly tell you, you are too honest (a noted Libertine
I profess my self) and talk too soon of Marriage: Can I part with my uncurbed
liberty, and on my Neck wear such a heavy Yoke? No, let crooked Hams, declining
Shoulders, furrowed Cheeks, be awed by Ceremonies; if you love me in the way
young people should, I Will fly to meet you, and we'll meet merrily


It Is strange such a man can use such language.


My tongue speaks my heart freely: Fair one, think on it, a close or private
Mistress is Court Rhetoric; a Wife is a mere rustic device; and so good
morrow


How like you this, Caland ino?


A well-bred Gentleman, I am now thinking whether or no in the dark, or drunk,
I formerly might not have met his Mother; he must have some drops of my blood
in him, for at his years I was much of his Religion


You may perceive I seek not to displant you, where you desire to grow; for
further thanks, it is needless complement.


Only your patience one moment.


Sir, be brief then.


Pray, observe.


How he looks like a Schoolboy that has played the Truant, and went to be
Breeched


Madam.


A new affliction; after all this preparation, I am obliged to hear you,


Madam -- while I at all parts (without boast) his Equal, in vain pursue you,
you follow one that with winged feet flies from you, and attempts to undermine
the Fortress of your Honor; nay, and more, your Virgin Honor


My friend Camillo here is an Ass; what a Devil has he to do with Virgin Honor?
when he should speak to the purpose, of the delight to meet in the old Dance
between a pair of sheets, my Granam calls it the peopling of the World


To vindicate my Honor, is needless; I don't fear the worst aspersion malice
can throw upon it


Can you undergo the scorn of being refused, for which I deeply suffer? I must
confess it makes for my ends; but his ills shall not make way for my good intents


You take that Sir, which yet I never granted.


Calandrino, stand to me, I Will force more, Sir; was she, this excellent she,
mad to be a slave to your lusts, and used as Physic after drunken Surfeits?
mankind must rise against thee, must we not, Callandrino


I, I, come, come, mankind must rise about it.


Murder!


Help!


Nay, nay, stand still, or you are disabled for ever.


'Uds death.


After a whining Prologue, who would look for such a rough Catastrophe? nay,
come Sir, fear nothing; and do you hear Sir, yet I love you too; if you take
the Wench now, I Will post it first, then Chronicle you were beaten to it


A memorable piece of valor this between you; it may perhaps deserve her
Shooe-string for a Favor; wear it without my envy, but expect for this
affront, when time serves, I shall call you to a strict account.


Nay, let him go to thy Mistress Boy; if I were in thy shirt, how I could nick
it


Madam, I fear my passion has offended; 'twas my excess of love to do you right.


You have sought my favors Nobly, and I am justly punished in wild Adorio's
contempt and scorn: more I cannot say, but that I truly pity you, and wish you
a better choice, which in my prayers, Camillo, I ever will remember.


It Is a sweet Rogue, what Thunderstruck!


I am not so happy: O that I were but Master of my self, you should soon find
me nothing


What would you do?


With one stab give a fatal period to my woes and life together.


For a Woman, better the Kind were lost, and Generation maintained a new way.


Yet all this is nothing to Calista.


Down into the Country amongst your Tenants, there you shall command twenty
Calista's, for every night a fresh and lusty one, Nut-brown wholesome Girls, I
have bred 'um to it; should their Fathers murmr, straight his Lease is void


Hang thee, and thy folly, come away.


Censured, Madam! what Lord or Lady lives worthy to sit a competent Judge on
you


Yet black detraction will find faults, when there are none.


Her foul mouth is stopped; you being the Object, rest secure of this, all the
Braveries of the City run mad for you: Come, come, it is nothing for you, being
a simple Maid, that never had a hand in the Honey-pot of Pleasure, to sorbear
it: but such as have lickt there, and lickt there often, and felt the
sweetness, will


How her mouth runs over with the rank imagination?


If such can, as I named before, the Kickshaw being offered, refuse to take it,
they may be Sainted, though for my part I don't think it possible to be denied


Not stir abroad, the use and pleasure of my eyes denied me?


Insufferable!


Nor write, nor yet receive an amorous Letter?


Not to be endured.


Nor look upon a man?


Flat tyranny, insupportoble tyranuy to a Lady of young blood.


She is my Mother that commands it, how shall I decline it?


Run away, take any course.


But without means, how shall we live?


What a question's that? as if a Bucksome Lady could want maintenance in any
place in the world where there are men, wine, meat or money stirring


Rather than in a thought or dream, I Will consent to ought that may take from my
Honor, I Will endure more than my Mother can impose upon me


I grant your Honor is a glorious dressing, but without conversation of men a
kind of nothing; she may as well command you when you are a hungry not to eat,
or drink, or sleep; and yet all these are easy, compared to the not seeing of
a man: I will not urge Camillo's love, but make trial of Adorio


And give my Honor to his lust.


There Is no such thing intended, Madam; yet now I think on it, write to'um both,
catch one fast, and then throw the other in Mirtilla's mouth


It Is a business to be considered on.


When the satisfaction of your love's in question, to talk of consideration is
of no moment; if your Mother would allow you a Dancer in the morning to
well-breath you, a Songster in the afternoon to open your Pipes, a Servant to
air you in the evening, you might bear it; but not to see, or talk, or touch a
man, O abominable


Do not my blushes speak how willingly I would assent?


Do something, Madam, to deserve'um, and blush after.


I, I, do something as Mirtilla.


SIr, Sir, are you ready?


To do what? I am sure it is not yet Dinner time.


True; but I asher such a dainty bit for Breakfast, as yet I never cooked; it is
not Potargo, sri'd Frogs, Potato's marrow'd, Cavier, Carps Tongues, the Pith of
an English Chine of Beef, nor the Italian oyled Mushroom, and yet a drawer on
too; and if you show not an appetite, and a strong one, I Will not say to eat,
but devour it, without Grace too, for it will not stay a Preface: I am shamed,
and all my provocatives will be jeered at


Art thou in thy wits? what newfound Rarity have thou discovered?


No such matter Sir, it grows in our own Country Sir.


Leave prating, and serve it up Sirrah, bring in your dainty.


'Twill bring in it self, it has life and spirit in it, and for proof: Behold
now, fall to boldly, my life on it it comes to be tasted


Ha! Calista's Maid; you are welcome fair one, aims your designs at me?


I am trusted with a business of consequence, which I would to your private ear
deliver


I told you so, give her Audience on your Couch, it is a fit State for such an
Ambassadress; dispatch first for your Honor, you know what follows


Come Sir, will you please to vanish, or I Will --


O Sir! pray don't; O Sir! pray don't forget how you used your Tailors Daughter
when she brought you home a Stomacher to keep your Breast warm.


Now, pretty one, your pleasure, you shall find me ready to serve you; if you will
put me to my Oath, I Will take it upon this Book


O Sir, the favor is too great, and far above my poor ambition; I must kiss
your hand in sign of humble thankfulness


So modest.


It well becomes us Maids Sir, spare those blessings for my Noble Mistress,
this speaks her chaste desires with this Ring


Oh the powerful Charms by that fair hand set down, Heaven be pleased to
qualify this excess of happiness, or I shall expire with a Surfeit of
felicity! with what art the cunning Lapidary has here expressed the Rape of
Proserpine; I apprehend her purpose, and oblige it, yet not as a helping
friend, but a Husband; I will meet her Virtues flame with a lawful heat, and
warm our Hymenical Sheets with such delights as leave no Sting behind'um


You speak well, and I believe you.


Would you ought else?


I would carry some Love-sign to her, and now I think on it, the kind salute you
offered me at your entrance, hold it not impudence that I desire it, I Will
faithfully deliver it


A kiss; you must excuse me, I was then my own, now wholly hers; but there is
Gold to bind thee still my Advocate, I Will not fail the appointed time.


Not a kiss; I was coy when it was offered; and now justly, when I begged one,
am denied

If I catch either still my game's well played,
But if I miss I Am with repentance paid.

You are mistaken, I cannot be the man you are sent to.


Not you the man, you are the man of men, and such another in my Ladies eye
never to be discovered


I am a mere stranger to thee, -- or will at least seem so.


Still the more probable, since Ladies as you know affect strange dainties:
this is not an Age in which Saints live, but women, knowing women


As most are at a coupling age.


Why Sir do you Gallants travel, but at their returns to discourse the
difference in foreign Females; as the lusty Girl of France, the sober German,
the plump Dutch Fr^, the stately Dame of Spain, the Roman and spritely Tuscan,
the merry Venetian Curtizan, the English fair Companion, that learns something
from every Nation, and will fly at all


But may I ask without offense your gravity, what Title your Lady bears in this
City


If you were true Town-bred, you would do the business first, and ask that
after: Sir, she is no Half-crown Trader, nor no Beldam so frozen up, a Fever
cannot thaw her


Leave this impertinence, and come to the matter.


Impertinence! what my Granams Cat left in the Malt in Impertinence teeth; if
it be impertinent to say her Name's Calista, God buy to you, and your
impertinence too


Oh I have heard of her, for Chastity and Beauty the wonder of the age!


Pray not too much of that Sir, fair and free, I Will subscribe too, and you will
find her so


This cannot be Calista, your covering your foul ends with a fair name, gives me
just reason to suspect you have a plot upon my life


A Plot! very fine; nay it is a dangerous one, beware on it: I plot to bring you
in a minutes space to those a man of Snow would ride a thousand miles for; you
shall be received by one whose touch would make old Nestor young: a terrible
plot, a kiss then ravished from you by such lips as flow with Nectar, a juicy
palm to guide you safe to a private room; but I almost forget, to make the plot
more horrid, the retiring Bout, the silver bathing Tub, the Cambrick Rubbers,
the imbroidered Quilt, a Bed of Jessemine and Damask Roses, a mere Powder Plot
to blow you up: and last of all, a Bedfellow, to whose rare entertainment all
these are but fools


No more, her breath would warm an Eunuch.


I knew I should heat him.


I am flesh and blood, your motion I approve, I Will come.


My plot's on your life, a base and dangerous woman, farewell Sir.


I will along too, come pardon my suspicion; hear, hear, you shall.


I am good-natured, you may do what you will with me, at twelve I Will be your
Convoy


I desire not better.


How do you like my Gown?


It Is rich, and Court-like.


My Mother little dreams of my intended flight, and that these are my Nuptial
Ornaments


I hope so.


How dully thou answered? do thou envy Adori,'s noble change?


No Madam, I am a little daunted; how to bear your absence, that very thought
confounds me; to be devorc'd from all my comfort, can this be born with
patience


The necessity of my fate commands it; but I vow by my Adorio's love, I pity
thee


Pity me Madam! a cold charity, you must do more, and help me.


Ha! what said you, I must; is this fit language for a servant?


One that would continue your poor servant: Can Mirtilla fit mourning alone,
imagining those pleasures which you this blessed night enjoy in the embraces of
your Lord, and mine too, in being yours? shall a stranger sow you up in a sheet
to guard that Maidenhead you must pretend to keep, and 'twill become you? shall
another do this, and I pine with envy? Pardon me, either let me go with you, or
by my life I will discover all


Thou can not be so treacherous and cruel.


Pray don't tempt me, for it is resolved.


Prithee Mirtilla be not so violent, I am so taken with thy affection. to me, I
will send for thee


When?


This very night, by Adorio I will.


Forgive my boldness past, 'twas iny zeal to serve you.


I thank thee for it.


You Will keep your word.


Still doubtful.


Now Fortune play thy game,
It shall be hard but I will hit my aim.

It Is eleven by my Watch, the hour appointed, I hear none stirring, some cursed
business keeps her Mother up; I Will walk a little circle, this short delay
asflicts me, and I presume to her it is no pleasure.


What Is now to be done? would I were a Bed, I am so sleepy: by this hand I Will
break the house for you tomorrow, and she shall be yours by fair or foul means


This is the time, I take it, I was ordered by Mirtilla to come; she may
perhaps, to take the air, open the Casement


Would you were in her Cellar, so I were a Bed.


And looking out, will be a new Star to be gazed on by me with adoration.


Is not here fine fooling? Pox of gazing, and sighing, and peeping, and prying;
if you must go to it, put her to the squeak at first sight, and there is an end.


Mirtilla.


It Is her voice.


You heard some footing.


Most certainly.


Speak low, my love Adorio.


The darkness befriends me now, most honored Madam: Alorio, your servant.


If you are so, I do commend your silence, and this kiss assures you I am
wholly yours.


Now miss, and may you be gelt.


Madam, think on Mirtilla.


I am the fortunatest man in these night works.


This slowness amazeth me; but here comes somebody.


Whether shall I fly for succor?


These arms shall be a Castle of defense; how her heart beats; take comfort,
dear Calista, Adorio loves you, loves you in a Noble ways silence becomes you
till we are in safety


O blessed error!


They have cast me, and say I must wait; but I have found some of their
Cordials may be a provocative that was prepared to enable me to perform the
Marriage night-duties, up it goes, be it what it will. I cannot dread any
danger where she is: it is pleasant, some restorative to animate their spirits;
this nights ramble, with other encumbrances of business, has almost tired me; I
feel sleep apprehending me for my neglect of nature, it is too powerful, I must
obey.


'Uds death, I cannot find the sleepy portion that is prepared for my Ladies
Mother: What Dormouse asleep a ready? much good may women expect from you! what
a Devil do you mean to do? my old Lady's coming this way; here is a lump of
Sluggard: you lie with a Lady, you lie with a drunken Sow, so you will be taken
napping; thy Nose shall pay for this.


What Is the matter you stay so long? is he fallen asleep? how Camillo, who I
took for Adorio! wake him, and bid him be gone


I must carry him on my back then, for any way else he is not fit to go: is he
not dead? cold by this hand.


O, O! call in his man, let him remove him; he has got some hurt in his night
rambles, and comes here to die, to have the shame fall upon me


Stark dead! are you sure? you have held him at hard service; I Will be hanged if
Muggulla has not thrown him on his back, for she is an old Swinger at these
sports


Leave your idle discourse, and convey him away.


Out of the house you cannot carry him, your Mother must see it done.


Search him Calandrino, if he be not wounded any where.


O here is large wound! how it is swelled! this must, this must be cunningly
drawn out, should it break, 'twould strangle him: O what a deal of foul
matter's here! this has been a long time of gathering: here is a gash too in the
Rimb of his Belly, it may have matter in it; he was a choleric man I see; what
comes from him is as yellow as Gold: how, troubled with the Stone? I Will cut you
for this.


It must be so, he has drank the sleepy portion which was designed. for your
Mother, so that we'll lay him in the great Chest in the next Room, may be when
he awakes we may have a more fit opportunity to let him out


I had rather bury him quick than part with my purchase; let his Ghost walk, I
care not: who is that? where is the Chest? I am afraid her calling should wake
him.


A shrill voice, it comes with the wind.


Then I Will take this way.


Why, Sir?


Because I Will trust my heels before all the winds in the Sky; we are far wiser
than our Gransi^^s were; and thus I Will prove it, they say, haste to the
beginning of a feast, there I am with'um; but to the end of a fray, that is
Apocryphal, it is Canonical, not to come there at all: after a Storm, there are
still some drops behind


Pure fear has made the fool a Philosopher; come, help away with him.


He Is wondrous heavy, but the Porter's paid, there is the comfort.


Away, my Mother will come out.


Now if he wakes not, I am made for ever;
And if he does, 'twas but a fools endeavor.

WAs ever man thus crossed?


So blessed I hoped to have been; this is the finest wild Chase.


What Is that you mutter?


A short prayer, that you may find my Lady, your wished-for love, though I am
lost for ever.


Calandrino, light a Candle, it is horrible dark.


O me! what is that? from whence could that come?


I don't know, may be the old Lady has discovered our coming.


Draw the Curtains, I say, you Rascal; what a Devil do you mean to do? Adorio
will get there before I shall come


If it be a Spirit, it made use of my name; it is somewhere in the room.


I am afraid, yet dare not stir, for fear you should be found here.


Sirrah, I say Calista made the appointment, and would you have me fail her,
Rogue, Dog, Devil


It must be some Imp, it has the Devil so frequently in's mouth.


I tremble to think on it.


'Zounds, I Will stay for this damned Dog no longer.


My courage fails me, doubting it is not mortal.


Oh the Devil! the Devil!


What can this mean? that seemed to be Adorio going out; how came I to have
this wooden Tenement? this room they left me in; now dare not I call Muggulla,
because I am ignorant how matters go in the house


What noise was that I heard?


Madam, I know not, nor what caused it; but I am in as much doubt as they could
be in fear, how by what means I was laid in this Chest; Providence I must ever
bless that it proves so well, since you allow on it


What Is this? 'twas necessity made me so careful of your proceedings; now you are
at liberty, I desire your absence


Madam, it is strange, but for once I Will withdraw, and render you my hearty
thanks for the care you have used to preserve me safe, and your own Honor.


My loved Adorio, though disasterous chance has made me lament thy absence, it
pays me ample satisfaction that I am now possessed of thee


Away: have you played your game with him, and now come to me to retrieve your
appetite? I must reassume my ancient Faith, all Womankind is false.


False man, but more treacherous woman, it is apparent you jointly have
conspired against my weakness, for which expect my just anger; reply not.


She commands both, one is enough for me,
If I be false, Love is a treachery.

Good speed on all sides, it is main strong Wine: O the yauns that Muggulla will
make! look to your Stern, dear Mistress, and steer right: Stay, let me see,
I Will try her by thy Nose first, for if she be a right Sow, sure she will find it:
yonder she comes; O how she holds up her Nose like a Jennet in the wind of a
grass Mare


It Is Wine, I Am sure it is Wine, excellent strong Wine, very good Wine; this way
too


How true she hunts, I Will make the Train a little stronger.


Stronger and stronger still, still blessed Wine.


Now she hunts hot.


This way it went sure.


Now she is at a cold sent: O well hunted! that is she! that is she!


O if I could but see it! O what a precious sent it has! but handle it, and
then but taste it


Now I Will come in view.


Still it is stronger: Calandrino, what have thou got there? answer to the point
man


It Is Wine, Madam Muggulla, sweet Sweet-wine.


Is this a drink for Slaves to tipple on? dear sweet Sweet-wine come hither;
give me a Bottle thou most debauched Drudge


With no small pains I purchased this on purpose for you, to show how willing I
am to give you all my service


I will give thee more: there, kiss my hand on it.


I thank you cleanlily for your dirty favor; how rank it smells?


By your leave sweet Bottle, and sweet Sweet-wine, I now come to thee, hold
your Cap under


She sucks off her sweet Sweet-wine, sweet, sweet, sweetly: how do you like it?


Hold up your Cap again Sir, and now come kiss me: I Will be your friend at a
word Sir; come, drink to me


I must not be too bold with this liquor.


Here Is to thee then; it is for thy good, it is confessed; nay, it is naught for
thee, and may chance to make you break out, and spoil thy complexion: it is
excellent for me, I have a cold Stomach, and the Wine


Blows out at both ends.


Kiss me again, thou shall kiss Calista too: again cherish thy lips, I Will show
thee all


Bless my eyes!


Enter all the secrets in my Country Commands, and thou shall be my Heir, and
I Will leave thee Heaven knows what


I believe so; but I shall never know.


Then you shall have my Daughters two sweet Wenches, but you must commit with
me first, and show yourself a Gentleman


Excellent Mistress Muggulla, I thank you heartily.


And prithee, Calandrino, take heed of being overtaken with too much drink,
it is a lamentable fin: O it is a damnable thing to be drunk, Heaven cannot endure
it! And hark you, one thing I would have you do, knock my Husband on the Head,
for he is an errant Puppy, and cannot perform; why, where the Devil is this
foolish Bottle


O how her Husband would cry, did he know how drunk she will be with this Wine!


Who Is that talks of Wine there?


I think it is your Husband at the door.


Bring him before me, I Will beat him damnably; nay, break the Bottle about his
Pate, then tie it to his Tail, and all the Dogs in the Town shall follow him:
Come, sit down, and let us propound a modest question, to see who is drunkest,
you or I


The very sent has disabled me; what is the question?


Whether Whitehall or Cheapside be nearest Whetstones Park? or what is the
natural reason, why a woman should long to make her Husband a Cuckold? Bring
the Curate, that learned Philosopher, that found out a Pudden had two ends, let
him with his Jacob's Staff discover what is the third part of three farthings,
three halfpence being the half, and I am satisfied


You blow me down with your Learning.


Too much for that Bull-head, my Husband: Hang him, he is but the shadow of a
man of action, a debauched Puppy, let him sleep, and thou shall sleep with me


You are a very loving worthy woman, I had as live she had said I should have
lain in the Hog-sty


Not a word of Wine Callandrino, or any thing like Wine, or any thing
concerning Wine, or by, or from, or with Wine: Come, lead me like a Countess.


Then it seems you ever have affected me.


Should my Lady stand by and hear't, and in her sudden fury kill me for it, I
durst not Sir deny it; nor is it me alone, but all our Sex, I think, stand
bound to be enamoured of you


O my Fate! I am justly punished for my defended wantonness: I that scorned the
Mistress when she sought me, now I would upon my knees receive her, am become a
Prey unto her Bondwoman: thou art one of those aim to be the wrong way
Ladifi'd: Was there no forward Page or Footboy in the Town to do the feat, but
I must be chosen for the Executioner? how durst you hope it


Kings sometimes leave Calveare, Salmon, and eat Sprats; in modesty I dare
speak no more


How came thou to my hands?


My Lady being slipped aside in the dark, fearing her Mother should find out the
appointment, and, as I thought, quitted the house, thanks to the darkness of
the night, running after her, I run into your arms; and I had wronged my
breeding near the Court, had I refused it


You expect to reap the Harvest of your Flattery but your hopes will be
blasted: I assure you I am tired, I must sleep; you could lie down too


Willingly, so you please to use me.


Use thee?


As your Pillow Sir, I dare presume no farther.


Well, sit down.


I am ready Sir.


So nimble.


Love is active, nor would be a slow thing, rest securely; Sir, on my
Maidenhead, I Will not ravish you.


For one so fair, I Will trust you.


Let all the joys of rest dwell on his Eyelids; let no dream disturb your soft
and gentle slumbers: I cannot sing, but I Will talk you asleep she snores
already: I am all fire, I can no longer forbear, I Will touch his lips, I am
intranced; our Fancy, some say, in sleep works stronger, I will prove how far
mine will work.


My Bones ache with sleeping on the Bench, and I am exceeding cold after my
heat, I must seek out a mere convenient Truckle-Bed: Ha! do I dream? No, no, I
wake; as I live Adorio in a handsome Wenches Lap: O Whoreson! you are better
accommodated than I have been with my old drunken She-goat; I Will call my Master
and his Mistress to this Pageant, this may work more upon her than all he can
say: Master, Madam, come forth


Well, what is your hasty business? what have you seen the Devil? or how?


No Boy, no; but here are some that you thought not of.


Adorio.


The Idol you used to worship.


Is this Mirtilla? I was but a Cloak to his intended Villainy.


I knew 'twould take.


I Will not kill him sleeping, but if you please, I Will wake him, and then make
him fall a Sacrifice to your just anger


No, reserve your blood for a better use.


My fond love is turned to extreme hatred, his very sight is odious.


I have thought of a punishment for 'um, and then leave him to his Harlotry; if
she prove not torture enough, hold me an Ass: I saw their Horses not far off,
I Will cut their Girts and Bridles, and turn 'um out to the Road


In his Hat he wears a Jewel, which this faithless Strumpet, as a Salary of her
Lust, deceived me of; he shall not keep it to my disgrace, nor will I stir till
I have it


I am not a professed nimmer, yet l'le make a shift: by your leave Sir, it is
restitution; pray bear witness I do not steal it; here it is


Take it not as a Mistress's favor, but a strong assurance I am your Wise.


O Heaven!


Pray in the Church: let us away: have you not been billing in the Hay, and so
deserved this unexpected favor


You Are pleasant Sir, come, will you walk.


As thou art a Gentleman kill me not basely, give me leave to draw my Sword.


What Is the matter? do you dream?


A fearful one I dreamed, methought Camillo's Sword was at my Throat, Calista
frowning by, commanding him, as he desired my favor her favor to strike off
my head


Mere imagination; here is your Hat.


But where is my Jewel?


I looked upon when you slept.


What Is come on it then? Restore it; thou have it; force me not to search thee


Search me.


You was before your Ladies entertainment a Night-walker, traded in picking of
Pockets, when tame Cully's charmed with your prostitute fluttery, vouchsafed to
embrace you


Love, give place to anger; were thou an Emperor, 'twas false; in thy teeth
l'le tell it thee, steal what I present


This will not do, though thou have swallowed it, I Will rip thee up, but I Will
recover it


Help, help, help, murder!


What, a new plot; let me have it, I say.


Hey day! at it before folks! fie for shame; you are a hot Cock of the Game.


O me wretched Maid!


Hold her up, she will fall again before her time else: Come, come, Mistress, the
man's a well-timber'd man, he is whole Chested, and may be a little forward with
his work, in time you will make him ride more moderate; then if he prove not of
the right strain, Cuckold him first, and after make a Capon of him, never fear
a Rape, fear him not


Methought I heard some Women's shrieks; what, was it Calandrino?


Nothing, only Master Adorio would force her to say one Lesson too often over,
which is a fault I seldom heard a woman complain on, to refuse that sort of
exercise


My too fond Love Adorio, I have for ever banished from my heart, and in lieu,
the Holy man has given me to Camillo, in whose worthy love Calista must be safe


Calista, you are all goodness.


Nay then Adorio be a man, I see the Diamond; Mirtilla forgive me, thy honest
virtuous love I will repay; take me, and dispose of me as you think fit


Chain him up; and when you feel the loving hour coming on you, let him
recreate you, and then to his Cell again, in a short time you will find him a
sober Companion


My heart cannot let me give a denial; take me your faithful Handmaid.


O who shall take me! for something has taken my Husband, the Fates be blessed:
but whether above or below he is gone, that matters not


O! to Heaven he must go; you have been always a careful woman in that kind:
Well, you and I will never marry; for now we may drink and sleep together
without control, since that Ram-headed Block is removed


Lord, I am so troubled with the Teago, I believe it is because I drink but
little Wine


It Is a raw humor blows up in your head, you don't take it often enough.


'T may be so: truly Sir, I don't drink above a Bottle in an hour.


How many's that a day? Mrs. Muggnlla, l'le be your Doctor, and administer
effectually, I warrant you


But are your Dancers ready?


All things ready: pray seat your selves, that I may have room to perform
matters of admiration: let your eye be riveted to my heels, and miss not a
hair, breadth of my footing: our Dance has a most melodious note, and I command
you to have Ears like Hares this night for our Masters Honor, and something of
my Worship; your reward is to be drunk blind, like Moles, in the Wine-cellar,
and though you never see after, it is the better: and do you hear wire-string
Cats guts men, and strong-breath'd Hoe boys, for the credit of your Calling;
twang it perfectly, as you would read your N^ck verse; marshal your selves in
the Rear, the Van is ours: Come, Mrs. Muggulla, imagine it our wedding day.


Adorio, Let us forget all but honorable friendship, and let that last till
Time shall be no more

Now may all here, that love, as they are Friends,
To our good fortunes find like prosperous ends,

OUr Habits and our Acting such appears,
Like weather-beaten weary Travelers:
Who have endured more then may here be told,
From Eastern blasts and sharper Northern cold.
Which keeps our sadded Hearts in deep suspense,
Wanting a place to fix our Residence.
Yet if these Radiant Beauties will but please
To smile on our Endeavors, 'twill much ease
Our Cares, abate our Fears: well knowing then,
Their Influence creates Favors in those Men:
Whose noble Bounty and Compassion may,
Transform our sable Night to cheerful Day.
So by your Goodness with your mercy mixed,
We wandering Planets may in time be fixed.
AS timorous Crack with Bailiffs close beset,
Knowing her Rigging cannot discharg her Debt;
Scrues up invention to the highest pin,
To make a Trap to catch the Devil in.
Melting in tears with looks half lust half love,
Hoping the hot-rein'd ravenous Foe to move;
Sighs in his Bosom, Sir, if you will be kind,
I would do, you know what, you know my mind.
The goatish hell-hound boiling in a Fever,
Cry's damn the Plantiff, swears he will never leave her.
Imagine now the feat is done, and she
Is gone and clapped him for his Courtesy.
I just like her, have ventured out to you;
Could I but wheedle and over come you too:
Then like a loving and a fearful Elf,
I Would send you sound away, be clapped my self.

