AS a young Girl that is newly come to Town,
And in her Russet wanders up and down,
Ventures her Maidenhead for half a Crown,
So our young Poet with his first Design
Hazards his Credit for a Pint of Wine.
Honor's grown wondrous cheap, as well as Plays;
I Gad, both are worth nothing, now adays,
Since every Fop presumes to wear the Bays.
Never was Wit so much abused before;
The Trade's grown common, and the Jilting Whore's
Debauched in every Street, at every Door.
You men of Wit, of Honor, and Renown,
Those little Fops, the Monsters of the Town,
To be thought witty, with their Noise cry down.
But let that pass; Damn all those men of sense,
Whose Wit consists in Noise and Impudence.
Our Fate's so hard, and you are so severe,
To hiss and rail, is all your Business here.
The Visor-Masks you mind, and not the Wit;
Talk Bawdy, and Debauch your selves in the Pit.
Then in a rage, as if your Wit was scared,
You damn the Play, though scarce a Word you heard.
Pray let Good Nature, now that slighted Miss,
Whisper the Wits, and beg 'em not to hiss.
For those whose Wit consists in gaudy Clothes,
In vamping Old, and studying New Oaths,
I Will leave, until their want of Noise and Sense
Damn 'em beyond their own Impertinence.

BElieve me, Sir, I have told you what you Worship may most certainly trust to.


May I not speak with her?


You know my place -- there is no more hope from the deep pit of Grief, to raise
in her any conceit of Love, than there is to raise her Husband up again from the
cold Bed he sleeps in. Take this for all: My Lady, Sir, has vowed to live and
die a Widow -- So I leave you


Is It possible? Well, I know not! but if she has made such a Vow, and keep it!
to find out such another and a Phoenix, is but an equal labor


Save you Sir Oliver.


As much to you, kind Mr. Rash.


You have been with the Widow, this melancholy Lady already. Give you much joy
of your fair hopes, Sir Oliver


As much to your self Sir, kind Mr. Rash.


I Will hope as much as I can, though you are a Knight, and I but an honest
Citizen: A Mercer is a Merchant, and will look for good Ware for his money


If he should enter now; I Will see the issue.


You know my coming to speak with your Lady Mr. William:


But she is not at leisure to hear you.


I hope you do but Jest.


Believe me, Sir, in Earnest.


But I Will not take it in Earnest.


But you must.

Though you are a Citizen, you are not free of this Hall, and therefore must
have no admittance


Give you much Joy of your fair hopes. Another --


Save you Gentlemen: how is it Mr. Rash?


As well as may be Mr. Plush.


You have got the start of me, I see that Gentlemen; a Suit brought me home
this Morning made me stay somewhat the longer; but my Tailors Bill, like a
Woodcock as he is, shall be so much the longer a paying -- you have been within


In our time.


I mean this Morning.


But the Lady means no such thing, Sir.


We heard of your Worships new Suit, and would not go in before it.


I Will lead the way then.


Mr. William good Morrow, good Morrow sweet Mr. William: and where is the Lady?
you see we come to come to her

By your favor, Sir, you are too hasty.


Why, is not the Lady up yet?


Not for you to take her down Sir. Farewell.


This Fellow's saucy.


Minds not your Worships new Suit; but we must be content.


We may be patient, Sir, but not content; for nothing contents me but the Lady.


Who have we here, Mr Plush, Mr. Rash? I dare be so bold as embrace you two --
but my Noble Sir, my SIR of a Thousand per Annum


Why, I can be a Knight an I list Sir.


And I can be Knight an I list Sir.


Dubbed with the City Dagger -- then Rash would be rash indeed: you come to see
my Sister? Las good hearts! Methinks the Gates of themselves should fly open to
such brave men as you are


You have the Old Heart still, Sir.


The Young Heart still Sir Oliver -- the Mad Heart, the Merry Heart -- the
Light Heart, with the Candle of Conceit burning in it as bright as Lucifer,
Hesper and Vesper: you have not been within? I Will turn out this pair of Asses,
and then you shall see my Sister. I perceive by your melancholy looks, my
melancholy, pettish, peevish Sister is not at this time to be spoke withal.
It Is such a foolish Thing; -- she knows not Worth, nor how to entertain't:
suffice it Gentlemen, I do; and shall not go behind her back to let her know
your Merits: and in a just proportion to that Merit, that mass of Merit, you
shall find her favor: So Mr. Push and Mr. Rash I shall desire you to leave us


You Will remember.


Shall I remember (Gentlemen) to eat, to sleep, to drink? then I Will remember
you --


Then? -- when Sir Robert?


When I am asleep -- awake I shall never mind 'em, for their Worships are
hardly worth it


Yes in a just proportion to their merit.


Yes, that is just nothing -- hang 'em Glowworms, hang um.


Here Is another Rub in our Alley, Sir.


A Tenants Son of mine -- and how does my honest Abraham?


The better your good Worship is well Sir; I was to seek your good Worship, at
your Right Worshipful House Sir; but missing you there, I rejoice I have met
with you here


Why? what is the matter? Abr'am, what is the matter?


In the way of Love, as they say, from my Father and my Sister, and my the other
Sister too -- you know who I mean Sir Robert


Thy scolding Sister?


You are in the right.


And how does Margaret my Pretty Tenant?


That Pretty One is pretty well Sir.


Remember me to her by this.

Within this day or two at the farthest I should breath a Gelding; it may be
that way, and visit my Pretty Tenant


Long may your Worships Gelding breath, and your Worshipful Self also. I am in
haste Sir Robert


Take your own time, Good Abram.


Thank your good Worship Sir Robert.


I have done your Patience wrong,

Indeed I have; but the best that lies in me to right it, you shall command.
Now to my Sister

Now where is my Sister?


She Is within Sir Robert.


Come then, let us to her.


You must pardon me: she is so retired to Solitude, and set so deep in grief,
that till her sighs and tears will give her leave to entertain such worthy
Visitants, it is her strict command that no man enter


Not my self?


Your self, Sir, if you would not swell her grief too big for her faint Breast
to carry; give her way, a little time may change her


It Is enough -- you see Sir Oliver:


Your love, Sir Robert.


But, as her Gentleman discreetly said;
A little time may change her: We must still
In such a kind humor win a Woman's will.

Come, thou make such a matter of nothing.


Nothing, do you call it? I know not, but I Am sure I feel something -- it is
almost kicking ripe already


Almost kicking ripe? -- come, come, thou art a Chambermaid still: -- and I
prithee what is this but a Work that belongs to the Chamber


Well, you will not marry me?


And hazard my place with my Lady -- and yet now I think on it -- I will --


Marry me?


To some of my Old Acquaintance: there are Hundreds in the City that have
swallowed worse bits than thou art


Urge me no more; but let the Love you seem to show be expres'd in Words, that
better suit with such a Robe as this, and my immutable resolve


Then I persuade in vain, yet whilst you live (encompassed thus with sorrow
and solitude) a Widow you seem to voice to the ill censuring World some
imperfection in your self. It Is true, you lost a worthy Gentleman, my self a
Noble Brother; yet if you loved him living, love him dead; then I am sure you will
cast all sorrow off, and cease to wrong your self


Mark you that now?


It Is the best Tombstone you can lay upon him; the noblest Monument you can
erect; and to that Monument an Epitaph, shall make him live for ever


Law you there now! -- shall make him live for ever! -- you are not dumb tho?
-- are you


Would thou were, or I had lost my hearing; I can wish nothing so adverse to
me, as your Tongues: and therefore if your Visits bring with them nothing but
these persuasions --


Keep away.


Nay, as speak't as think it. -- Here Is a coil for a Husband, I have had for
my own part -- 1-2-3-4, and yet if the fifth come up handsomely to me, I know
what I I know, I warrant you


How! Five!


Fifteen, if the Destinies had so decreed it.


Madam, there be Suitors below to see you. Mr. Rash the Mercer -- one Plush a
humorous Gallant, and a spick and span new Suitor a Country Gentleman, one Mr.
Gregory Dwindle


Spruce Mr. Rash I know.


And I, Mr. Plush, a notable humorous Coxcomb: but what is that Gregory?


Unknown to me; but believe me, together they make up a delicate Motion. -- Is
your Ladyship pleased to see um


Present your Motion somewhere else, my Griefs give way to no such lightness.


I Will tell 'em what you say.


Pray stay a little, I know (...)ors are but empty things; not worth our
serious thoughts yet Sister, pray let um Enter, let 'em look upon you


Still your desire's my trouble.


Come, come, pray: you are so melancholy.


Why, their mirth will be a means to Cure you.


Kill me rather.


Go, bid 'em come.


Bid 'em be gone.


Nay, then you are too Cruel: Stay.


Sister, if you know no other Merriment, than what you raise from my vexation,
take it, I will not hinder your Desires; pray take it


You will not leave us, will you?


Yes.


And go mew your self up in your Chamber, like a cloystered Nun, there waste
away your tedious Hours in sighs, and spend the Day in groans: for my part, I
am altogether for Mirth and open Air; a Prison cannot content me -- but Sister,
before you go, let me entreat one favor of you


What is it?


That in your absence you would be pleased to let your Waiting Gentlewoman appear
in your Apparel: it is but slipping off this upper Garment, and this Mourning
Veil, and she is my Lady


How? my Bab, my Lady?


It will be sport to us, and to your self a rare advantage, Sister.


Though pleasure be no pleasure to this Bosom, since you propose the
acquittance of that trouble, your desire's granted


But be speedy then with your directions for her carriage in it.


Did you ever see such a self-willed Thing as this is? a Widow this two months,
and yet not hear of a Suitor


The Gentlemen, an't please you.


Yes indeed, an't please you.


Mr. Rash!


Your Servant, Gentlewoman.


Mr. Plush!


My name is Plush. Master my Title, and Sir a Title that may be.


And my name is Gregory.


Fop -- the sound is out of season -- but where is the Lady?


I, where is the Lady?


We would see the Lady.


I hope she has done Mourning now, has she not?


Why, does the Lady Mourn?


Indeed she does.


It Is a delicate thing to Mourn. -- Well, an my Father would but die once! --
would we could see this Lady


You have your wish already.


Beauteous Lady.


Most beauteous Lady.


Most beautiful Lady that may be: for yet I see no such matter.


Thy Eyes are veiled with Ignorance, or else, through this thin veil, thou
might as we, -- behold matter of admiration! -- you will vouchsafe; -- not yet


Alas! -- upon their captive Heart, my sorrows yet have set too strong a Guard
for such delights to enter


I could wish, that Conqueror of thy Heart and all his Guard were visible, that
I might challenge them


I marry Sir, that were a challenge indeed.


Methinks I could -- do --


What do you think you could do Sir?


O -- my most delicate Lady!


Do his most delicate Lady; a terrible Do indeed.


Well Lady; if this be the man shall have you, you shall have a Man I can tell
you


If I be the Man that shall have her, she shall have a Man I can tell you.


But he is a fighting man.


A fighting man? Let him play at the Ancient Weapon, an he were a Fencing Man,
I Will have about with him


The Ancient Weapon! -- what Weapon's that?


Why this.


As Wise as Valiant; it is the Ancient Weapon indeed Sir.


And why not this? --


I am better acquainted with this.


Well, we shall meet?


And meet again: tell me of fighting -- Lady!


I see you are valiant Sir; -- and you are happy in having so much Valor as
you see attend your Beauty


I must confess them Worthy Gentlemen; but they must pardon me; -- the Worth
that I have lost in my dead Husband, is so full and fresh upon my
understanding: -- that all else have but homely entertainment -- and yet you
are welcome Gentlemen


For that we thank you.


We must hope still.


Well, and my Father would but die once! I live hope too Lady.


You see their Valor Sir, -- and what is your Weapon?


I am no man of the Sword -- I have no Weapon.


How Sir, no Weapon?


What should you do in Cupid's Fencing-School, and have no Weapon?


There was a Time I could have crossed a Cudgel; and if any man strike me, I
have a Weapon too


The coldest Flint has fire I see: what Weapon?


One that is indeed all Weapons, Long Sword, Sword and Dagger, Sword and
Buckler, Single Rapier and Dagger, Halbert, Half-pike, Quarter-Staff, Short
Sword and Gauntlet, and that terrible Fly-flap the Fauchion


All these in one?


Or one that is worth all these, and that in a word is the Law.


A terrible Weapon indeed.


There, let me firk um, and jerk 'em; there, let me stand upon terms; there,
let me play the Master, and Mr. Attorney my Usher, and then with all the
Weapons in that School have at 'em


This goes heyond your Rapier, or that Ancient Weapon the Fist.


We are betrayed: my Husband and Sir Oliver.


What Is to be done?


Play the Lady a little longer, and handsomely Bab, and I Will promise thee a new
Gown


Come, come, we will speak, and speed too, my Knight of a Thousand per Annum.
Where Is this Mourning Lady? What, my Madona and my Lady Littleworth! hoyday!
this Covy of Coxcombs too


Sir Robert.


One.


Kind Sir Robert.


Two.


Worthy Sir Robert.


Three: yet never a wise word amongst them. What still dumb Lady? An ye were as
heavy as Lead, 'twas but a light trick of you to deny access to such a man as
this is, and allow it to such Minncks as these are, god's death I could kick 'em
out of the Room, and be angry with you, though you are my Wives Sister, for
lodging such baseness within you


Why, you are not out of your Wits, are you?


You have no Wit to be out of, Gentlemen: you are all Hobby-horses, an it
please you to leave the house now, and come again -- when you are sent for --
you shall be -- heartily glad to be welcome


You see his humor, Gentlemen, pray leave us.


Why? but I hope --


Not one word more an ye love me.


Nay, then -- I would I were but gone once.


Come, take my Counsel and forget him.


Never.


Still looking downwards to your Husbands Grave?


To those that wear so sad a Suit as this, the Grave's the Glass they use to
deck um by. Pray give me leave


Prithee look up a little; -- I can show thee a Glass, that shall reflect no
such affrighted shadows


Oh! Oh! Oh! --


Excellent Mourning Lady.


The Nuptial Knot binds Loving Paires together, only for term of Life, has no
extent over the Divoice of Death


Pray, pray, no more.


That only binds the Living to the Living, and not the Living to the Dead.


That flesh that has Soul within it; the endowments and excellencies,
bounteous Heaven bestows to that, has nothing but the frightful shape, and the
cold Figure of a Man


Yet this; whilst you dote upon your Husbands dust, you do (sweet Lady) dote
upon your Torment


You have my Resolution, so pray leave me.


And you be buried in your Husbands Grave: I see my Suit must dye too.


Yes, and let it, let it for ever dye to her, and live to one deselves it
better. Come, I Will bring thed, though she be my Wives Sister, to one that is
younger, fairer, richer, and it may be -- honester too


How, Sir Robert, Honester!


Yes, honester; an she prostrate her self to a Set of Moris-Dancers -- and
neglect such a Caesar as this is! Come Sir Oliver, let us away


Nay, but hark you, hark you Sir Robert, and worthy Sir Oliver, that you may
see this Lady, is not the Woman that you take her for; look, do you know this
Lady


How, Bab?


My Ladies Chambermaid!


A trick of mirth they put upon the Coxcombs.


Were you my Lady?


So your Lady would have it, Sir Robert.


My Lady Bab -- how like you this Sir Oliver?


This Change has put some life into me Sir; and I must tell you, bettered my
opinion both of the Ladies Wisdom, and her Goodness


But hark you Wife, may we not see my Sister?


Faith, yet her temper is not as we'd have it; but we shall win her by degrees,
and turn her melancholy to a sprightly humor


Then I Will not doubt my happiness.


Come, Sir Oliver, mean time we will see what mirth my House can yield to
entertain you with, -- A ha! my Girl! Why, such a Wench is worth her weight in
Pearl


Well, thou have played my Lady like a Lady:

I have a trick from this Conceit to do,
Shall make us sport, and help thy swelling too.

SIR, I have spoke my danger.


A dangerous case, believe me; and yet methinks there is no great danger
neither: for, say a man offer to blow thee up with Love-powder; if his Train
lie so open, you may see it: you have the Wit, I hope, to shun it, -- h'an't
you


I have done hitherto.


And do thou fear thou can hold out no longer?


Sir, I do not.


That Is well, but to the point: what is he? do I know him?


Yes, if you know Sir Robert Malory your Landlord, Father.


Sir Robert! He aim against thy Chastity? has he bestowed upon thy Infancy that
care and cost that he has done; maintained thee amongst his own, and for this?
is this the best you can affoard him


No -- Father, for these should I forgot to pay, the most obsequious Duties I
can tender, 'twere just in Heaven I should forget my self


Had this been spoke of any other man, I might have lent an ear to it: -- but,
Sir Robert! Noble Sir Robert! -- that brave man, Sir Robert! our bounteous
Benefactor! Say he has scattered some words in the way of merriment, some
pleasant, idle -- wanton -- what do you call it? sprinkled a little Bawdry in his
speech? as Courtiers may, else they are no men of Fashion. That cuts not off a
Maidenhead -- Nay, perchance the Merriment that you interpret Lust, was his
mere love to Virtue


Virtue!


Yes: -- it is my Conceit, that all his Talk, his Letters, and all the Gifts he
sent you, were employed in the way of Trial, not to make thee naught; but so to
sound thy goodness


Think you so? I Will think so too then Father.


This is fine, you have the golden time on it.


What golden time? you will still be scolding.


Scolding! Marry come up Mrs. Jinny-finny; we cannot speak to you now, but it is
scolding; well, I say little


Nothing at all were better.


But I Will say something; has a Woman a Tongue to say nothing?


Prithee be patient Sister.


Yes I waun't you, I must Wash, Scowre, Brew and Bake, and do this thing, and
do that thing, and do every thing, while such a Beautiful Blouse as you are,
must sit still and do nothing


Why, do thou not see her at work?


At work! a great piece of work adeed Law! Prick, Prick, Prick, as if she had
nothing in the World to mind, but Prick, Prick, Prick; but it is no matter, it is
but my hard Fortune; I am a Fool indeed, and so you make me


What, what, a Shower after this Peale of Thunder? Nay, do not cry good Gillian.


Oh! Father, Father!


Now Boy, what News with you now?


Brave News Father; News of the brave Sir Robert.


Pursue me still -- Good Father give me leave while he is come in and gone
again


What leave?


To absent my self, but in some Neighbors house: I have a trick to pass him --
You may tell him I Am gone to London


When I have told him already you are here in the Parlor a sewing.


Come, you are a Baggage, a foolish Baggage to injure with such frivolous
suspicions, a Gentleman of his repute and goodness: come, let me hear no more
on it


Sirster Gillian, I have the rarest News for you.


For me, it is well: and what News have you got for me Sir?


Skipping News, lepping News, tripping News.


How! Dancing Brother Abram? Dancing!


Dancing, Prancing, Advancing; Nay, it is a Match: a Match upon a Wager.


A Match! who be they?


Why, all the Maids of our Town Edmonton, and all the mad Wenches of Waltam.


A Match, and leave me out! When, when is it Brother?


Marry, even this Morning, they are now going to it helter skelter.


And leave me out! Where Brother, where?


Why, there Sister Gillian, there, at our own door almost; close by the
May Pole; on the Green there: hark, you may hear them hither


SHALL the Lasses and Lads, to be merry all Day,
To Frolic and Kiss, to be bucksome and Gay,
Meet all on the Green
To choose out a Queen,
And leave out the bliss of their mortal Estate;
The Lass that is all Ayrie, and longs for the Fate,
That Fate which is common to those who can tell
The Blessings of Youth, that in Pleasure excel.
And I be not One!

Thou't never be Two, I think; for on my Conscience there is no man that knows
her has valoir enough to come near her


Why, well said Girl, keep but that resolution


And let his purposes be what they can, they cannot hurt thee. Look, he is come
already

Good morrow Tenant: Good morrow Beautiful Tenant.


As much to my Worthy Landlord.


As much to my Worthy Landlord.


My Tenant Abram -- God-a-mercy good Tenant Abram. I want your welcome Fair One.


Sir, you are welcome.


Had this been spoke with Smiles upon thy Cheek, I durst have sworn the
Syllables had been the language of thy Heart. What, still so adverse to my
Pleasure? Tenant, and my young Tenant, shall I crave the Room? I have something
to deliver from my Lady, that she would have a Secret to the Ear of every one
but Margaret


The Room? our poverty possesses nothing Sir, but what is yours; you may
command it. Come --


I smell my Landlord: but -- no more words but mum.


Still, still this cloud upon thy brow, sweet Peg, you know my mind.


And you know mine Sir Robert.


I mean, I love you.


Not half so well as I love you.


Love me! then there is some hope again.

Let Us see how willingly you will yield to my Embraces. How! fly 'em Peg? such a
thing denied, how can thou say thou love me


Yes, Sir: I love you in your Name, your Reputation, the Dignity you carry in
your years, -- in your Lady. I love you Sir, in the fair Benevolence you owe her
Virtues. In a word, Sir Robert, I love you in that Purity, that shall when
Death threatens, make you look boldly on him. Thus I love you


This is not that I looked for; do you remember your Father is my Tenant?


Sir he is.


Nay, since you urge it, let me tell you Minion, he is not my Tenant neither,
but my Beadsman


And like an humble Beadsman in his Prayers remembers all your Charity.


He does, but you forget it Fair One.


Then let Hea'vn when we Petition the reward it merits forget me too.


Is It not forgetfulness, when all the Love the tender cares and cost, that from
thy Infancy, to this ripe Growth, I have bestowed upon you, cannot gain me such
a request as this


This! Alas! your greatest gain's in losing: Nay, I Will tell you, the Love, the
Care, that Cost, that Noble Breeding, which seems to you a winning Argument, is
my best Argument against you


How?


Why, Sir, the Education, that fair Breeding you have bestowed upon my Poverty
has made me what I am, and plentifully furnished my Soul with all that best
adorns her, that whatsoever is in opposition to it, is --


What?


Your Lust, Sir Robert: I am bold, but yet can kneel to beg your mercy for it.


What? she imagines Water to my Flame, is Oil to increase it. The more she puts
me off, the more she pulls me to her. Come, come rise, though you be so unkind,
I can forgive you: I must not look at first to have so great a happiness, as
that we aim at, but must use degrees, and then --


What then?


For this time Peg, I Will leave thee: What? leave thee, and leave thee nothing?
that were foul play indeed: there; nay, take it: indeed you shall


Indeed I will not Sir; for any service I can do you, your Favour's price
sufficient. No, not yet? I have it. How I forget my Duty? Here so long, and never
a Chair to ease you? Abram, Brother; pray pardon me, Sir Robert


How, a Chair? kinder and kinder still: Nothings like Gifts to gain a Woman's
will


Come, come, a Chair there for Sir Robert.


She pities your long standing Sir; but I have a Chair almost at my Fingers end.

Look you Sir, will it please you Bum this Cushion.


How, Bum it Tenant?


Yes: Bum it Landlord -- look you Sir, of this fashion.


Come, you will be foolish.

You know my mind, bring 'em in.


An I bring 'em not in, let Sir Robert kick me out.


Come, fit down; nay, yet a little nearer; you need not be afraid to sit by me.


I am not Sir, as long as you are virtuous.


I Will be as virtuous as an Alderman, and abhor all -- How now? what is that?


Music, Sir Robert.


Rot on their Fiddle and their Fiddle-strings, thou art my Music.


CHarming Beauty, you alone
Deserve the Glories of a Throne;
Such a Queen we Swains admire,
And each Breast is filled with Fire,
And yet vain is our desire.
Cho. Though to Love and fond Joys we our thoughts do prefer,
Yet none can be worthy, not worthy of her.
Thou Queen of our Joys, and thou Goddess of Bliss,
Though the Charms are too great to be mentioned in this,
Let a smile, since you are made the bright Lady of May,,
Instead of a frown all our Services pay;
For since Frown's a Fate, no severer can be,
Your Smiles can rejoice us and set us all free.
Cho. Free, we are free from all trouble and Strife,
And this day is the best, and the happiest of Life.
You see we sweat to make your Worship merry; how do you like our pastime?


I like it so well, I could wish you were further off with it.


Have we this for our kindness, Sir Robert?


Marry come up, Sir Robert.


Shall I entreat you leave the Room.


The Room?


So she said, but I know she means no such matter, only a trick; tell her you
wonnot go


Pray leave the Room.


We wonnot.


Wonnot?


No: We were sent for in, and we will not go out again yet. Out? Marry gip
there, never a good Inch of a thousand. Fiddlers strike, I Will strike you else;
and cut your begging Bow-strings


I must be gone, I see; these miserable impudent Stallions will overrun me
else. Farewell, nothing grieves me but --


But what Sir?


We cannot -- kiss at parting -- Farewell.


Come, we will have the the other bout, and then --


Nay, we will have no more at this time, here is enough.


For you, but not enough for me; you shall command me, shall you?


Nay, be not angry Sister, it is no Command, but my Entreat -- Good Sister.


Well, since you entreat me, and seem to know your betters, you shall have your
will for once. Fiddlers lead the way, and Wenches follow your Leader


Leader! if scolding were fighting, what a Leader would thou be? you would bring
'em on with a Powder


O! Father, Father!

Never a wise word for a Wager: Sir Robert's gone I see.


Yes, Sir, he is.


And how do find him? I do not think the man, that your suspicion seemed to
make him


You have a good Opinion of him Father, and I Will not stand to cross it.


Come, you are a peevish Thing, and I Am afraid have been distasteful to him.

Consider all is his, we must be wise, Since by his frowns we fall; and favors
rise


Madam, can the Heart thus feed (like Vultures) on it self, and bear the
torment? for such is Grief, sweet Lady


Sir, as I am, pray leave me.


Leave you to be out Rivall'd by the Dead!


To me he lives, and every hour appears so really my own, as all the Embraces
of a Second Match would stick upon me like the Leperous Stains of Lust and base
Adultery, and by this pray understand the vainness of your suit, and so
conclude it


No more: I have my Answer, and am Married.


Married!


As you are Madam, to my Self alone, no other earthly Creature; yet my Love
Petitions, that if e're hereafter, (since now you are so firm) you find an
alteration in your Soul, to fancy Wedlock, that I, I your Servant may, for that
second Happiness to Heaven, stand fairest in your Election


That satisfaction take, if e're I marry, it shall be you, that is my
Resolution


I am extasi'd beyond the Joys of Heaven. If e're I know the Sweets of Hymen,
I must find 'em here. So, we are married now, and in this Joy I leave you


Here Is a Rub in your way a while, my brave Knight of a Thousand per Annum; and
how do find her, is she coming? Ha


You see my Hopes set Smiles upon my Cheeks; let them resolve you Sir.


I understand you: but when is the Day?


Nay, question that no further, we shall talk on it.


I, I, when a thing's done, it is done.


You Would feign be Doing too then?


Would I not? do you think I am all dead flesh? -- I warrant you.


Now Mr. William, what good tidings now Sir?


My News is, worthy Sir, that Mullinex the stout Sea Captain is returned, and
yesterday was seen on the Change


George Mullinex?


The same Sir.


How is it -- ha -- you lose Color Madam?


Lady.


Sister.


Beshrew the Name, and Owner of the Name, which has disturbed you -- What Is
that Name to you


Sir, nothing but my Trouble.


A troublesome Captain indeed Sir: a Suitor to her once, and Rival to her
Husband Sir James Lovely; but missed the mark he aimd at; he shot fair, but
Lovely fairer; upon which he went to Sea; where he has been three Years, but's
now returned: and hearing (as it seems) that she is a Widow, he would renew his
Suit, give her a Broadside, Sir, and Board her; nay, let me tell you, you have
a hot Rival, one that will Quarrel, Fight, and by my Faith -- I am half afraid
of Danger


If he be not all Valor and no Judgment, I fear none: but what so e're he be,
I Will be but what becomes me


It may be some new Beauty has him now; some Foraign Mistress.


Or it may be Sister, this time of Service in the Wars, has made him only in
Love with Fighting


More Vexation.


This Mountain brings forth a Mouse! have we talked all this while of a
Captain, and now must be troubled with Coxcombs


The Gods protect you Lady.


Thank you Sir.


I spoke to that sweet Beauty.


But I must speak to you Sir, for you see she has other employment. Pray stand
aside a little


If I must, I shall attend her leisure.


You must attend her too Sir: do you not see she is busy.


I would not interrupt her.


I would not interrupt her! Is that the resolution of a Lover? let me come to
her


But you shall not Sir.


Nay, if I shall not Sir, I will not Sir.


Is that the Resolution of a Lover?


A man can do no more than he can do: but an my Father would but die once --


Make nice to me of entrance! where is the Widow? for so I hear she is now.
What, mourning still? I am a bold Gamester: Save you all at once; all Suitors
Gentlemen


Yes indeed, Sir, we are all Suitors.


You Are a little to Rash in that, for I am none.


Nor I neither: would I were at home.


What are you Sir?


Sir, I am a Citizen, and a Mercer.


I know you by this Wheel,


He that can purchase a Lordiship.


Thinks he may purchase a Ladyship: -- You my Rival! Can you fight Sir?


It may be I, it may be no, Sir.


Then I Will try whether you can or no Sir.

Not a word as you love your Coxcomb.

Are you a Suitor too Sir?


Too Sir.


You Are an Ass, Sir, -- can you fight?


Fight? in a Ladies Chamber?


Why? where would you fight Sir?


Why, the truth on it is -- I would fight -- no where.


I thought as much, and therefore I will kick you -- good Mr. Outside of a
Gentleman follow your valiant Leader


You will not kill him, will you?


Have you so much Tongue, and never a good Tooth, Madam Fumble?


Fumble, Fumble, -- you are a most --


Peace, an you love your old Carcass -- peace.


You bind me to a Patience.


One Post support another? What are you Sir?


Why -- I -- am -- a -- Gentleman.


Will your Arms bear you out in the Title?


My Legs shall bear me out, Sir.


Then you will not be beat out as they were?


I should be very loath to be beaten.


In troth I think you would Sir.


Do I look like one that would be beaten?


If you stay you must.


Why, therefore I mean to be gone Sir. But if my Father would but die once.


You see his rudeness, and to prevent the danger it threatens, pray leave me.


I will not add to his too prodigal heat, nor be cold to fear it.


It Is my Love.


And mine to tarry, not offending you, with humble contradiction.


Are these your Suitors Madam?


A little in Jest, but you have paid them in earnest.


I did but speak in the way of Compassion, and your Lordship called me -- Madam
Fumble, Fumble, did I ever fumble with you Sir


Be wise in being Silent; I hear you have lost a husband: How is it Widow?


You Will quarrel with her too, will ye?


You are so nice: I cannot Complement, kiss your white Hand and fleer upon you.
I can kiss your Lip, hug you, and tell you I must lie with you


There may be those of your Acquaintance, to whom this Language would be
pleasing; but to let you know how ill't appears to me, I Will change my Room Sir


But you shall not.


You lay too rude a Violence upon the tenderness of Ladies.


Do I so Sir? I thank your kind remembrance. You the man? this Ladies only man
Sir


My desire is you would not be uncivil.


Whatsoever my Will produces, I can justify.


That power maintains offense, is weakness Sir, and has no taste of Breeding,
or of Manhood


I Will make you taste of something.


But you shall not. Have we no Servants near us.


Save him; help.


O! you are wicked Captain.


What? Naked Weapons in Ladies Chamber?


Take her in, poor Lady, how she is frighted!


My Noble Knight and Master!


We have done Sir.


And you have done, there is nothing to do; if nothing to do, the less to take
care for; the less to take care for, the sounder we sleep; and asleep we think
no body hurt Sir. And so having done, I have done


You have the advantage of me.


I must tell you, this rudeness better would become the Field, than such a
Place as this


That you may know, I know as much as you instruct me to, meet me to morrow.


I will not.


As good have said you dare not. The Apology is pretty, all Cowards use it.


How, Cowards?


Cowards.


His Lunacy has shot its self into my Blood. A Coward! proclaim me what you
call me, if I be


You Will meet me then?


I will.


Where? Thou or I.


O -- Nay, if you break so violently out, I shall suspect it is to prevent our
Meeting; for Manhood covers such Intents as these under a friendly seeming --
thus --


I marry, Gentlemen, I like this well.


Believe me, I was jealous of worse Matters.


And I, never trust me else.


You know the Place and Time, Sir.


You shall find, I Will forget neither.


So -- now Beauteous Widow: -- is she gone? I have no Courtship to pursue her
with, nor will I offer it: but let me tell you, he that best hopes her favor,
if he have it, must bid fairer for it than this Sword: and so I Will leave you


How is it Sir? your eyes speak trouble still?


Sir, if they do, it is only what they have from your Sisters Trouble. I must
leave you till better hours invite me to return


Nay, Sir Oliver, our ways lie both together; therefore pray permit me, Sir,
to wait upon you


Is It possible? be sure you raise not this suspicion from your own Fancy; look
the ground be good, the matter's weighty


I tell you but the Voice in Edmonton, which is, that he daily Visits this
Country Innocence; whether he has enjoyed her yet or no, I am not certain; but
it is so reported


I will not be too easy to believe, nor yet too confident, I know there is Fire
in such a Wenches Eye, and Old dry Wood will soon be kindled; which if he be,
I Will find a way to quench him, quench both Fires, And satisfy at once their
loose desires


Sir Robert's Hand, art sure on it?


I am too sure.


And sent to thee last night?


I by this Day was it, Father. I know it to be his Hand; what do you think of
this now


I know not what to think.


You see the picture of a Lustful Heart drawn to the life.


I believe thee: yet Old Sir Robert.


Yes, even Old Sir Robert: who have we here, a Beggar?


An she desire any thing here, I shall desire her to be gone with a vengeance:
who would you speak withal? -- Hum -- hum -- ha woman


A poor old woman; be not offended, Sir.


And what would thou have, poor old woman?


My business is to you.


To me, what is it?


I, I, what is it?


Though I may speak it; since you fall into causless suspicions of me, either
hear me as I am willing to present it to you, or as I am I Will leave you


Nay pray stay -- Good Father, leave us.


Take your own course; -- nay -- nay, come you would fain be scolding: on or I Will
set you forward


Now to this private business; what is it?


Love, and I assure you one worth entertaining from such a matchless Beauty,
here is the witness of it;


If no foul end attend it.


It Is a fair offer for that short delight the Gentleman would purchase.


You have not named the man.


It is Sir Robert.


Sir Robert Malory?


The same. I might renew your memory by relating his bounties to your father;
and by those you cannot choose but guess he loves you, Fair one. Witness this,
this noble Prize; nay look upon it, it is a fair one, Lady


Yet much too poor to bribe an Angel to impurity. Go bear 'em back again, and
tell thy Master the lustful Knight that sent 'em, Where we rate our Chastity
above our Life, we will not sell it for such Toys as these are


How! such Toys -- I dare be bold to tell you, in this act you do not only
lose this Golden Offer, but Happiness for ever


Yet more vexation. I will not call thee Woman, for a Woman would never labor
thus t'infect the Name with such a sin as this is. Father, Sister, for Heavens
sake help me. Father, Brother, Sister


How now, Girl? why, what is the matter? ha?


Examine her. But she perchance may tell you what she does is her duty, and
that to make our poor and barren Fortunes freghtful with a Golden Shower


A Golden Shower.


O rare! an thou can do that, Old Woman, long may thou rain I beseech thee.


Father, you may believe me, for she is.


What?


A Bawd.


A Bawd?


Nay, though the Brow of such a one be Brass, she dares not contadict it: she is
no less, and her employment from Sir Rober


How? come come take heed.


What should she take heed of? An she be a Bawd she is a Bawd.


That Is certain, were her Bawdship employed amongst Ladies. -- But she shall
ride in Triumph: now Tobacco and Aqua vitae burn thee


Now the stinking sweat upon thee and thy painted Journy-women.


How many Noses do you think have been lost in your Bawdships service?


How many Coaches have you bawdifi'd?


How long have you run on in this sin? How often have the Coachmen and Horses
been whipped for your pleasure


Was this Sir Robert's bounty? Base, base woman; but we'll reward your labor.


You lose a Daughter of me else.


And an Abram of me I can tell you.


I Will go get an Officer, Abram provide a Cart.


And let me alone for a Basin.


Has Love and Bounty this reward?


Yes, and the best it merits: Away, thou art a Devildrest in shape of Woman.


And thou an Angel. Now I have found thy goodness.

Know me better.


My ever worthy Lady.


Come, no more: thou see the purpose of this poor Disguise, therefore fear
nothing here. Nay, you must take it, since that which seemed to be the hire of
Lust shall now be the reward of Virtue: but you must imploy't as I direct you


Do but direct, and if I fail in any thing enjoined, let your displeasure
punish me severely


This is all; against my Husbands coming (for I Am sure he will not long be from
thee;) with this and more that I Will supply thee with, trim up this homely
Cottage and your self; it is my pleasure


'T must then be mine to serve it.


I have told you what she is, Mr. Constable.


A Bawd.


All over -- we'll not bate you an Ace, Mr. Constable; and therefore have a
care you do Justice


I have been amongst Whores and Bawds too before now, and I think I have
tickled them soundly


I think so too: A Constable, what whore dares deny him entrance?


For what belongs to this Staff let me alone. Come, where is this Bawd? where is
she


My worthy Lady.


My most worthy Lady.


Come, where is this Bawd here?

My most worthy Landlady.


What have I to do with Ladies? It Is the Bawd that my Authority must cope
withal


Constable, you may make a Hobbyhorse of your Painted staff, and ride home
again: Whip lie you there, and what say you to the Basin


I say, it is a base one, and the Barberly Knave that owns it, they say his Wife
had a Tooth drawn above, while he was trimming below, let him keep it for her
an he will, for we have nothing to do with it


Time's earnest with me to be gone: farewell, you know my mind, perform it.


With such a zealous care as Saints the will of Heaven.

The virtuous secret here Enclosed I Will show,
Since from pure fountains such pure Rivers flow.

Hey ho! good truth this little practice of my Lady has lulled me into so sweet
a fancy, that all this time I have been thus attyr'd i have thought my self a
very Lady; I would I were a very --


Maid again, would thou not Barb?


Well, and I be not I may thank you for it.


What, thank me for it and cry? Come come, conceal't a little longer, and I Will
warrant thee I Will find thee out a Father


Here Is one of the Fops already. Withdraw.

Mr. William, hist, do you hear? I have the worst luck at Women, but I Will to her


What Mr. Gregory?


The very same, Sir -- your Lady's now gone in, may a man be so bold -- you
understand me


Faith not yet, but there is hopes you may see her anon.


I had a glimpse of her, I cannot tell, but if my Father would but dye once.


I marry Mr. Gregory, his Passing Bell were Music.


The man that rung it should not sweat for nothing.


A happy day, Mr. William, and as much (though my Rival) to the sweet Mr.
Gregory Dwindle


Thanks sweet Mr. Timothy Lyning


How Is that Sir? -- Lyning?


A conceit he has, witness your Worships Coat.


It Is lyn'd indeed, and may line a Ladies Pettycoat, when such a simple Gregory
as thou shall dwindle but to hear on it


The dwindle in disgrace?


Tell me of lyning.? --


Why Gentlemen you come to see my Lady: which, if you kill one another, you will
hardly do, believe me


You have said right, Mr. William, and had it not been for that --

I had, but it is no matter, --


And so had I --


Well, an my Father would but dye once.


Gentlemen all, Good day: may we not in to the Lady?


In to the Lady -- you are somewhat rash indeed, Sir.


Enter the house I mean, Sir.


She is now going forth to her Brother Sir Robert Malory; what favor she may
bestow as she passes I know not. But be not to tedeous, I beseech you


Well, this melancholy Lady is a hard piece of matter to compass.


Some what straight laced, Mr. Rash.


An I could but come to unlace her, I should make her forget her mourning.


We all aim at one mark -- which only one must hit. I hope well.


And I hope as well as you Sir.


Have a care, you know my directions.

But one at once I beseech you.


Mr. Plush has the start of you, Gentlemen.

We cannot help it, worthy Mr. William.


Hope well, and have well, the Motto of my Arms if ever I live to be Knighted,
which if my Father would but dye once


You would be a Fool in Folio.


She shakes her head, what does she mean by that?


To hear him talk so like a humorous Coxcomb.

She has shook him off already.


I Will try my entertainment.


I shall have my turn I hope anon.


'Twere a very ill turn if you should not, Sir.


There Is the man, see how she smiles upon him.


No here is the man, see how she points at you.


She points at me indeed; but oh those smiles.


That smile's a laugh, a scorn, a mere derision.

Do you note his coming off, Sir, to her, to her?

Sir, what news?


Nay, I say nothing, what it was it was.


And what say you, Sir?


What she said she said.


That clapping of her hand upon her breast I do not like; she gave me good
words, but that is a tough bit on my stomach


I Will help you down with that, her words were these. It Is very true, you are a
very civil Gentleman, and one above the fortunes which you seek; but when the
heart is promised there is no calling back. These were her words, believe me.
Did she not shake her head? as who should say, you are the man must have her


It Is enough.


You are muffled up in melancholy too, Sir.


She gave me comfortable words, but that embrace, and thus her hand meeting her
heart so often moves she a little


Then you will be moved with nothing. I Will tell you what she said. Sir, you are a
good man, a Citizen, wise and rich, though these three seldom go togethe

But when they do, it is an Aldermans pace. The Maidenhead is your Aims, and in
your Arms believe me I wish one, for my Widowhood is otherwise engaged. These
were her words; you are the man must have her, did she not smile upon you


Yes, she did.


Why, why should you be maid then?

Look, he comes from her, and as melancholy as a sick Munkey. You are the man,
Mr. Gregory

She bockons one of you.


Me, me, I hope, and I Will to her.


You shall not go alone, Sir.


Now what is the happiness?


My happiness is, that what she said, she said.


You have had a long and a very gracious hearing.


I have, I thank her, a very gracious hearing. Why does she laugh so loud?

It Is not at me I hope.


At you? -- no Sir, no, -- what laugh at a civil Gentleman? I could tell you
what she said for a need


I should be glad to hear it.


Then I will make you glad, Sir, beseech you hear me.


You are a proper man smooth and soft; you have not your name for nothing. I
have heard you are valiant; fear no man, but the man that frights any man, a
Sergeant; yet you have made some of them run, two or three at once, and glad
they could overtake you too


This was a thing worth laughing at indeed.


But for Mr. Gregory the Country Gentleman (good harmless thing) she said
little or nothing to him. I have told you what she laughed at, you are the man
must have her --

Your pleasure, Madam.


I cannot tell if shaking of the head, and serious shaking of the head, may be
gracious sign of love, I am the man


Oh smile, sweet smile, full of splendidious rays, such as the Sun at Dinner
time displays: if I do not tickle her in figure, let me be counted a Cipher;
well, if my Father would but dye once, -- I am the man must have her


Your will shall instantly be done sweet Lady Gentlemen, it is my Ladies
pleasure you leave her at this time


my Lady desires you to meet her exactly at Ten a clock this morning at the
Devil Tavern, and there expect her coming

What discover your self before these Coxcombs? Away, away, you are the man
must have her


Most beauteous Lady.


Mr. Gregory, I have sent him off with a flea in his ear, only that I might
desire you to meet her at the Devil exactly at ten a clock, in some disguise
for fear of a discovery; and she will not fail to meet you


At the Devil, said you?


Yes, yes, at the Devil Tavern, and there you will find my Lady will be your
Lady. Be gone


Well, if my father would but die once, then -- farewell most beauteous Lady.


Mr. Rash, I have given him a Box to put his Pepper in; you are the man shall
have her


In good deed, Sir.


You Will hear as much from my Lady.


O might I be so happy.


Why you shall, Sir. I have told the Gentleman your mind, sweet Lady, who
desires no greater happiness on earth then to hear it from your self


Mr. Rash, though it scarce suit with modesty, my blush begs excuse; blame me
not then for saying of that I love you, since it is a certrin truth, and such a
one as you desire to hear, and therefore take your wish, you are the man shall
have me


May I build?


With Brick according to the Statute.


I mean upon this promise.


O, you mean upon the Lady, Sir: you hear you may, the foundation is laid to
your hands, and the Edifice half up already; and to complete the structure my
Lady would have you meet her in some disguise at the Devil Tavern, at ten a
clock exactly, and from thence to go with her to the next Chapel, and there be
put in possession of your greatest Happiness


I will not fail the time. Farewell, dear Lady. With this I take my leave.


Farewell, credulous Coxcomb; how easily are these Citizens gulled, and how
monstrously do they gape for the blessing of a debauched Chambermaid? Any thing
that has not the nauceous name of a Cits. Darling is as modest as an Angel


I hope to gratify me for the pains and care I take in thus providing thee a
wealthy Father and a foolish Husband: I may enjoy the blessing of your company


I shall not derogate from the custom of us Citizens, who long more for the
company of a Gentleman Usher, then a big-bellied woman for impossibilities; but
you must be a Godfather


I must not be a Courtier else, nor you a City wife; for it is always the poor
Cuckolds custom, to pick him out for a Godfather who has the greatest share of
his wife's company. But we trifle time; let us go. In such affairs swift motion
we desire
One hour can kindle and put out the fire.



Now, Knight, I see you love a noble promise too well to break it: you are a
Gentleman


Sir, should I find that I had lost my self in any thing that should proclaim
me less, I should not hate my Enemy so much as such a heady action


I am ready.


So sudden; although I came to fight, yet were I sure I could put by thy fury,
the fighting part should only be thy own, mine only my own Buckler


Slighted; 's death prepare, or --


I must not dally then; Mullineux


I Am ready.


Hold, Captain, hold; you bleed.


As you must do, or all my bloud's at hazard; come on, Sir.


How fatal, Sir, another close may be we know not.


No, nor do we fear it.


Then, Mullineux, what following hurts you have call not the work of my
unwilling hands, but thy frenzy. Captain, you fain


Take your advantage then.


Advantage, Sir, how mean you?


Of my wound.

My weakness, Bellingham. -- You see there is now no interposed resistance
between my heart and thy bold weapon, come


I rather wish that all thy blood were in thy veins again, though with that
strength, new courage, and the malice that but two minutes past pursued my
life; you should again pursue't, and put it to another dangerous hazard


Thou art a noble Enemy -- And now my troubled Understanding's calm again; I
see my self worthy the wounds I have, and all their anguish trebled -- thou art
just


I am too unmindful of thy wounds, thy smarting faintness -- but my cares shall
now only attend thy safety


Mind thy own -- fly Bellingham.


Let all my best desires be fruitless then; come, Mullineux, let me support thy
fainting body


Worthy Sir, you made me see that braves and boastings in good causes are, The
Dolphins wanton dallying on the waves
That foreruns tempests, this untimely graves.



You know my mind; fail not in any thing that lies in my direction.


Fear not me; you have made me brave, and I Will do my business as bravely.


And so for your Son and Daughter.


Nay for my Son, since he put on his bravery for a Gallant in jest, he will not
be persuaded but that he is a Gallant in earnest; scorns to think on Canvas,
course Frize, or a Sheepskin Doublet, or to talk but of Lords and Ladies. And
as for my Daughter --


Hark, he is come already.


In good Lady, it is his hum indeed.

If I can but hit the state of a Justice handsomely.

But here comes Sir Robert, I must go to my station.


Well Edmonton, thou that holdst her who holds me in the strong net of
Affection, I am once again come to see thee: how in th'imagination of this
sport my old heart capers? Well, this little house, this little cottage, while
it holds my Peg is my best house, my Castle and my Palace of pleasure


You are welcome, honest Gentleman; what would you?


Ha, what would you, Sir? By his face old Thrashard my Tenant, but by the
reverend outside that he wears I know not with what style to salute him


Would you ought with me or mine, Sir?


I would speak with Good man of the house, Sir.


The Right Worshipful Master of this house you may speak to.


What may I call your name?


My name in common is Thrashard, but with the Gentile Addition Oliver Threshard
Esquire Justice of Peace and Little


Justice of Peace and Little -- do you not know me, Mr. Oliver?


Not you Mr. what shall I call you? Belike you would have us know you whether
we will or no, Sir


Has not your Worship a son named Abram?


My Worship has a son that men call Mr. Abram Thrashard.


May a man desire to see him, Sir?


He Is not afraid to be seen, Sir -- Son Abram, Mr. Abram.


Come, here is a Gentleman desires to see you.

To see me, my Right Worshipful Father? if he be a Gentleman we are to be seen
and spoke to. Your business to me, Sir? -- hum -- hum -- hum --


Does your Worship know me, Mr. Abram?


My Worship does know many Gentlemen, some Lords and some Ladies too, Sir.


But me your Landlord, Sir Robert?


Landlord to one in Satin?


Your Worship remembers me, sure Sir?


My Worship remembers you not, Sir; must not, shall not, nor will not: Landlord
to one in Satin! Did you hear him, Right worshipful Father


I heard him, my worshipful son; just thus he talked to me too.


Landlord to one in Satin!


They talk of a wonderful Year, but here is a most wonderful Minute. I am sure,
worshipful Sir, have not you a sister called Gillian


Called Mrs. Gillian I have, and you shall know that I have: Sister, Mrs.
Gillian, Sister


There Is a Gentleman would speak with one Gillian, no more but so, plain
Gillian

You might have remembered the M, Sir.


Which of the M's Madona Mistress, or Maulkin?


Right worshipful Father, shall our Greatness endure the Maulkin?


I confess Forgetfulness: your pardon, sweet Mrs. Gillian.


It Is well you have changed your note, Sir; had you not, by this Chain I know
what I know, Sir


Do you know me, Mrs. Gillian?


For a saucy Companion I do, Sir.


Why this is admirable; what Brokers Wardrobe have they met withal? Let me not
mistake, and charge a kindness with unkindness though: for ought I know this
may be some conceit, that in the close shall to my entertainment add more
delight and luster. Worthy Sir, may but my boldness progress to the sight of
your fair Daughter Margaret, I have done, and rest indebted to your Right
worshipful self, and your worshipful son and daughter


Son Abram, call in your Right worshipful sister.


Now talk like one of us, a Gentleman; a Gentlewoman shall talk with the
Gentleman, and so as the Proverb is, It Is merry when Gentlefolks meet. Sister,
Mrs. Margaret, Sister


Your business, Brother.


Ask our Right worshipful Father.


I there is the star that ushers in my happiness.


With me, Sir?


My beauteous Margaret, how ere o'th'sudden changed into these rich clothes, I
hope you know me better then your father does, your brother, or your sister


Know you, Sir?


I hope you do.


Indeed I do not, Sir.


Not know me?


No; -- nor to be brief and plain do I desire to know you.


Not know me, I am Sir Robert Malory.


Sir Robert Malory? I do not know him; but I have heard of such a one, a
Knight, a City Knight, a piece of old dry stuff that is good for nothing, yet as
lustful as a Satyr: out upon him, wrongs his good Lady, such a beauteous Lady,
nay such a virtuous Lady; out upon him. They say his Lust most eagerly pursues
his Tenants Daughter, a poor Country Innocence


Ha, this the delight I looked for?


It Is reported he has done her good, settled a poor Estate upon her aged
Father; and of goodness must the reward be sin


Some Conjuration, Witchcraft.


How he sweats?


Sister, Pray call our mother.


Lady Mother.


How now, what is the matter?


How Is this? her mother? why this is my Lady, or the Devil in her likeness; I Am
sure she will know me


Desire to speak with me, Sir?


You Lady, will she not know me neither?


I cannot stand to talk, Sir.


Not with me?


With you, Sir? no, Sir? what are you, Sir?


Ha, do you not know me, Lady?


Know you, Sir? how? when? where? why? for what, Sir?


How? when? where? why? for what, Sir? why here is the finest mad fit, the most
worshipful piece of Lunacy, that a man shall desire to look on: why, are not
you my wife


Thy wife?


My wife.


I hope, my Right worshipful Husband, you will not see me jeered and derided;
he challenges me for his wife


My Lady your wife? By this Chain if you play the mad Alderman here, you were
better have done it in Bedlam. Your wife? Go to, no more but so, go to


Our Right worshipful mother your wife? By this Satin go to, no more but so,
go to


Methinks in such a Gentleman as you are, such sport, so old, and such a
reverend man, this wildness shows not handsome


Handsome quotha, my wife deny me too? If I be mad, I Will play the mad man's part
a little longer. Hark Lady, are not you my wife? are not you my Tenant? are
not you Abram Ninne? you Gillian of Brainford? you pretty Peg of Edmonton? and
this house here my own? 's death they jeer me. This is a trick of my Ladies, to
deride and shame me: she has discovered me, and there is no hiding of my faults.
Peg, wife Peg, I confess my love; but do you hear me, Lady? Madam Peg


The old man's mad.


I were mad indeed if I should not know my own Lady: prithee torment me no
longer. I was wanton I confess it, and blush to own I was so; but by this free
confession I hope to gain your pardon


When we walk thus abroad, how our once familiar Acquaintance will bow and
adore our Satin? but we know the worshipful nod, for a word we shall hardly
afford them


May I believe all this you have protested? well, but yet you may make
Relapses, how ere the fault is pardoned


My thanks, and promise never to dote again on her, nor any other. How likes the
Right worshipful this now


By this Chain exceeding well, Sir.


I protest by this Satin it is, Sir.


Please your Worships may I possess her now? Do you know me now?


Our worthy and right worshipful Landlord.


Will your Satin submit to that, Sir? Peg, I love thee, not for thy Beauty but
thy Virtues. The testimony of it shall be this; your states shall be as great
as they appear to be, I have spare bags will do it; and my care shall find you
out a worthy Husband. Right worshipful Tenant, I give you the House and Lands
you live in, and to maintain your selves and them with credit an hundred pounds
a year, and after your decease it passes to your Heirs, from thence to their
Posterities


Thanks to our Right worshipful Landlord.


For you't shall be my care and study to find out a just and fit reward to
crown your Virtues. This conquest gained, rewards are due to those
Who make such acts as these their greatest foes.



This is the place I am to meet my Lady in, and near the hour too; but I wonder
she would choose a Tavern! Perhaps she loves Sack before Matrimony, if she does
so do I; therefore, sweeet Mr. Gregory, sit down and recreate your self

A Bottle you conceive me of the best Canary; and if a Lady come pray send her
in


What Lady, Sir?


That Is counsel, but for satisfactions sake it is a Mourning Lady.


You are mistaken in the house, Sir; here is none but mad Ladies come hither.


She may be a mad mourning-Lady, for ought I know. If my Father would but dye
once, how happy should I be


If the Lady comes, you know my mind; I Am in the Figure Three.

I am for Canary: but what fellow's that?


A Country Gentleman, Sir, that stays here for a Lady.


Do you know her?


Not perfectly, but I guess some Madonna or other that haunts our house: we
have all conveniences


This Sack would taste better if my Father were but dead once, but as it is, it
is


You know the token?


Sweet Mr. Rash, I do, and shall observe it.


But what two fellows are they? I would be private.


Two Town Bullies, that call here commonly once a day, to drink a Bottle; their
stay will not be long


But why asunder?


For fear of quarrelling, Sir; men of such known valor are commonly at
variance


Another Room would serve me better; I am not fit for Bullies.


You need not fear them, Sir, they dare not fight a stranger.


I am for Sack.


This Sack is very powerful, for methinks, I could fight now; sa, sa, sa.


Hold, Sir, hold; I beseech you hold: let not me be the object your rage points
at


What, Mr. Rash, are you here? I'gad we are the happy men, I see.


I think so too, Mr. Gregory: put up, put up, and let us drink a health to the
Lady


With all my heart, and sing a health to her too, if my Father would but dye
once


Now you talk of singing, let us have a singing health, to pass away time, till
the Lady comes


With all my heart, but as for Mr. Plush he may hide his face like a velver
lining: we are the happy men


What, Mr. Rash, and Mr. Gregory Dwindle!


What, Mr. Rash, are you here too?


So it feems, and I fear we are all sent hither to be made Coxcombs of, for I
see no Lady appears


That may be, however I Will be merry, and sing a song, and drink a bottle; and a
Pox of Melancholy, my Father must dye, that is my comfort


Well said, Mr. Gregory, hang sorrow, I say: let us have the song.

Here is without doubt
Two Fools and a Lout,
Who came out of hopes to be merry or mad.
But I gad their delight
Has shamed 'em out right,
And has made the poor Citizen sad.
But let her be damned, and be wretched, and poor,
I Will drink till I Am drunk, and be jilted no more.

What say you, Gentlemen?


I Am of your mind.


And I.


Then show your selves true sons of the Pitcher, and roar out the two last
lines


Then let her be damned, for she is wretched and poor.
We Will drink till we are drunk, and be jilted no more.
Good morrow, Gentlemen, you may wonder my Lady chose out this place to meet
in; but when you know the reason, you will rather praise than blame her. She knows
you are valiant all, you for the Sword, you for the Law, and you, Sir, for the
ancient weapon, Fist


By your favor, Sir, I am for the Modern Weapon, Sword too, if I am provoked.


It may be so, Sir, therefore my Lady knowing your excessive Valors, and
desiring to have no Innocents blood shed in her cause, desires you to drink for
her


How?


He that drinks most, and finds the newest Health, my Lady vows to marry.


Say you so? nay for drinking and so forth, let me alone.


And me for drinking, drabbing, swearing, fighting, dancing, singing, and
huffing, let me alone, and if here are not Graces enough to win a Widow, the
Devil shall turn husband


And let me alone for -- if my Father would but dye once.


If I might advise you, Mr. Gregory, drink out of a Boot.


A Boot?


Yes, a Boot, and one of the largest you can meet withal. It Is new, and a
sufficient Jest to win a Lady


I can do it.


You need not fear the Lady then.

Out of a shoe, Mr. Plush, I think would take with her, for I once heard her
say, she saw the frolic, and it pleased her strangly


It shall be done, Sir.


A bottle serves your turn, that being off leave the two Fops, and come down
stairs, where you shall find my Lady ready to receive you


Thanks, Mr. William, let this reward your care.


Gentlemen, I must be gone, my Lady waits below to hear of your success, and
whoever gets the victory, let his loud voice proclaim it. Farewell


I see, Gentlemen, you are resolved to outdo me: if I lose the Lady for want
of drinking, it is my ill fortune, howe'r here is to her, and to that happy man
who has her


And here is a health to the unhappy man who goes without her.


And here is a health to the leg, foot, and person that in former ages wore this
famous Boot


This shoe has a devilish hogo with it: Essence of toes! how I admire you.


This boot has as profound an understanding as my Lady, and because I desire to
know the depth of one as well as the other; thus I squeese the Pitcher, over
Shoes, over Boots, I say


Why, Mr. Gregory Dwindle, Fop out of Mode, and Monster of the Town, dare you
presume to think you have won the Lady


Why, Mr. Timothy Facing, Fop Alamode, and Pimp to half the Nation, dare you
presume to think you have won the Lady


Yes, and to show I dare, thus I assault you.


And in return, I Will bootifie your Honor.


Dwindle, thou have wronged me.


Plush, thou have wronged me.


Thou have not won the Lady.


Thou have not won the Lady.


For which -- though I am loath.


For which -- though I am loath: but yet I must, my Honor cannot brook it.


Hold, hold, Mr. Gregory, I believe we are both choused: what is become of Rash?


Pox of our rash doings, how soon might one of us two have been nothing. But
what is become of Rash


Sneaked after the Lady, on my life.


O that the Rascal were but dead once, how I would maul him for all his skill
in Law


Oh, horror, revenge, revenge.


Blood and revenge assist me.


Why Gentlemen, what mean you?


Nothing, Sir, but revenge, revenge, I say.


They quarrel for your beauty, Lady.


Lady me no Ladies, for I Will be a Lady no longer, I am my Ladies Chambermaid.
Do you know me


If you know her not yet, you may know her anon by this, Sir.


By that, Sir. What Sir? Villainy, villainy, etc.


No matter for that, I Will be honest enough to you, Sir.


Pox of your honesty. Villainy, villainy, I say.


You cannot fly so fast, but I can follow. --


Blood and revenge, I say.


I, I, blood, and revenge, I say.


Fie Gentlemen, be patient, you are mistaken, and the loss you rave for so is
but imaginary. Did you not see the Jest


Yes, yes, I saw the Jest, that is, I saw Rash, and my Lady, hand in hand; But
blood, and revenge, I say


You are mistaken, it was Bab, my Ladies Chambermaid.


How! my Ladies Chambermaid?


The Lady is a Dish for your self to Feast on, Mr. Gre.


Is It possible? Gull him with the maid, to help me to the Bed of the Mistress?


You see my love, Sir? He Is a foolish Remnant-seller, and a Citizen: you are a
Gentleman. Hark in your ear, meet her within this hour, at the Chapel in
Dukes-Place


I shall have her then?


You need not doubt it.


Well, if my Father would but dye once!


Be gone, be gone, Sir, you will lose the time else.

-- Now for you, Mr. Plush, my Lady desires you to meet her within this two
hours, at Hide-Park corner; from thence to go to Knights-Bridge, and there
Enter into those pleasing Bonds, called Matrimony


Shall I have her then?


You shall but miss not a hair of my Directions, hark, -- be gone. --


I will not fail, I cannot choose but laugh at the poor Citizen, a Chambermaid?


Laugh on, at length I shall have all the cause, and bless my self, thus
happily to end, the troubles were begun in one nights pleasure, methinks I Am a
Gallant all over: and glory as much in making other men Father my Children, as
they do in Marrying their Debauched Misses to their servants, thus far I Am
safe: Dwindle must Marry my Lady Antiquity; but who Mr. Plush? Oh I have it:
Thrashard has a scolding Daughter, and one, who as much longs for a Husband, as
he does for a Wife. Her I Will seduce to meet him: if not the person, the Estate
will move her

Then all who smile to see Intrigues well done,
For love, or honor, will Applaud this one.

KEep off, I say, do not pursue the faithful: have thou not already
Metamorphoz'd me from a man, into a Monster? from a Reverend Citizen, into a
dishonorable Badg of Antiquity? I feel the horns, yea the very horns of the
Beast as it were rebel against the Flesh, and tell me I am transformed


From a Monster, to a Saint? Ah consider what a vile Trade you followed, how
you Cheated this, that, and to'ther Friend, and all for want of the true light,
which now is plentifully bestowed upon thee


A true light one you were indeed, and so I fear will prove; But have a care,
consider, I may reform, I may find out the ill turnings, the evil meanings, and
the sinful doings of the Brethren; and then reassuming my so late lost
Religion, be advanced the Cities head, and, as one of its grave Fathers has
already sacrificed the Devil and the Pope, and other the less faulty, and
harmless sinners of the Age; I may bend all my fury toward you, and with my
sword of destruction, which is the Beam of Justice, sweep ye all into that
honorable Mansion, Bridewell


Oh horrid! -- can thou name that place, and not tremble? Or think you that
common sewer of Sin, and not despise the founder. Bridewell? Oh horror! A
common Bawdy House, and made for the entertainment of none but loose, loose
Women, called by the vulgar Whores


'Twas built for thee, base Woman; But the spirit's weak, and vexation desires
a Resting place, I must sit down


Alas, poor spirit, I will sit down too, and keep thee company, even in
tribulation


The business is done, now Widow, and there is no frowning. Come, come, I am the
happy man, and so forth. -- Boy, some Wine, -- here is a health to that
Monstrous Coxcomb Rash. --


Oh, most Diabolical! my zeal pricks me, to give them some dehorting words of
Exhortation. Hum, hum. --


Come, come, I say, you shall drink, drink and be drunk, Lady, and then. --


Where are you Reeling, do you think, you profane abuser?


Why you blind Coxcomb, to a Tavern. Do you hear, Monster? if you will drink
you may, if not, you see this. --


No, I smell a Satan in it, I defy thee, do what thou dare.


Aminadab, I will beat thee into one Sponge, and then cut thee into pieces,
Hypocrite, unless you will do as I do, that is drink, and so forth. Will you
take


No, I will first turn Martyr, and take my affliction patiently, it is the oath
of the Brethren


And this is the Oath of the Hectors.


Do, strike, I am armed with spiritual armor.


Cease, wicked man, to persecute the faithful. These are not stripes of Love.
Alas, poor man he melts: and I in pity must relent for company. --


Well, Sir, the Brethren will meet, and then.


Then I will beat them too, and so commend me to um. Come along, Widow.


My zeal must find revenge, this persecution I find is the Badge of the
Brethren


Welcome, dear brother, how have you fought within this Wordly warfare?


Not without great danger of Satan's devices, but being confidently Armed with
the Spirit, I came off without any corporal harm, yet I suffered
notwithstanding, the persecution of a sword, and had that Hellish liquor Sack
most scornfully flung into my Eyes, which made my zeal grow hot to revenge me
of my persecutors


It was well done, and showed the stoutness of a Brother. The Element is good,
if in the hands of a zealous Brother: which makes me seldom be without it, I
have found great comfort in a cup of Sack


I profess, Brother, you say right.


The Bottle is full, I drink of it to fire my zeal, which is many times apt to
grow cold; will it please you to taste of it


I thank you, and will participate, -- trust me,


How soon is this credulous Couple deluded? by this means I hope to make both
Friends, In Zeal, in Drink, and Weddings, all have ends


It is indeed the very Water of life.


I I, therefore the Brethren use it, trust me Brother, it recovered Mrs.
Simple, that was struck into a vision, and wakened her so contentedly, as if
she had seen but a dream, it was at a Sermon of one Mr. Thumps


Indeed I knew him, he was silenced, because he broke a new Pulpit. A very
painful man, and much given to labor and Travel


You say right, he does much good upon the fisters; but as I was informed, he
was silenced for waking a Usurer that was a sleep


No, no, it was a Churchwarden believe me; but have you any more of this
Liquor


Yea, for the faithful, I have.


Ananias, take some of this, it is good to digest affliction.


Truly, Spouse, thy counsel is at this time very comfortable.


After adversity, prosperity has a pleasing taste. May I participate?


Yea, -- and much good


And I, with all my heart.


Thus far I Am safe and every thing succeeds according to my wish. Now Bab, thou
have a Husband, and one that is made of Wax, and as fit to take any impression,
as his zeal is to follow any Religion; But how you came so altered is a Riddle,
and one too deep for me to Conster. By this time all my Clients are Married,
from the Fop to the Courtier, from the Courtier to the Clown, and from the
Clown to the Precisian. All Is done, and safely, thanks to my happy Stars

What I shall get by this Prodigious Birth,
Is yet unknown, all I desire is mirth.

How is it, Captain?


Faith a weak man, Sir Robert.


Nay, nay Sister then I shall chide you. Weeping? Come, come, dry your eyes,
you have wept too much already


Had I thought to come, had been to meet this new occasion, I tell you plainly,
you would come alone for me


That it is my fault, so many tears are shed, I cannot but acknowledge, and
could my death, which once I thought more certain far than life, make
reparation for that rash act, of which, I, wretched I, was Author, you soon
should find an ample satisfaction


It was not that we came for; but hearing that worthy Gentleman, Sir Oliver,
upon this bloody accident was fled, we came to know the certainty from you


He fled. To stop his flight, I gave him what encouragement I could, told him
my wounds were nothing, and proclaimed the hand of Noble Bellingham, as white
as innocence. Do you see this Ring, your tears will hardly let you see it, yet
Ladypray look upon it. Can you call to mind a former sight on it


I have seen it sure, Sir Oliver's, I take it.


Lady, 'twas.


What comfort yields the sight on it?


I have shown this, to acquit me of those Treacherous thoughts, that you
suspected in me, against the life of Noble Bellingham, who as he parted to take
a journey in uncertain Paths, left this Ring with me


You have charmed us now from all our harsh suspicions.


I do not grive so much, this loss of blood, nor all the smart goes with it, as
by this I have lost the sight and the society of such a fair Example of all
goodness; I could tell you how much beyond the sufferings of a man,) I dared
him to the field, how meeting there, he did not look upon me as a Foe, but took
into his Embraces my wounded body, brought me from the field, and to the
diligence, and well known skill of this good man did leave me, and with him his
ample satisfaction for my cure, or whatsoever might be demanded


Sir, you have given him a fair Character.


He were baser than Envy that would not; and all this he did in the honor of
your Beautiful Lady


Lady!


Madam.


Dear Sister.


He loved you dearly; can his praises then offend your Ear?


No; Every syllable of his commendations is Music; but to think that for my
sake, his much commended worth should thus be lost, O I could weep my self into
a senseless statue, O Bellingham, O Noble, Noble Bellingham! No hope again to
see him


Do you wish it?


As life, or health, or Heaven.


You will not then deny one kindness to me?


What is it, Captain?


Only this, Sir Robert, I would beg since she desires to see him, the favor to
wear this Diamond, until I find fit time to send it to him


Send it?


Yes, no strict enquiries of me, if you dare trust me.


But direct me, Sir, I Will carry't him my self.


You know my bosom, Lady, if you will send it?


Take it, Captain. -- But,


I conceive all that you can urge me to, and will perform it to your own wish.


But why returns not Bellingham? Or does he (hearing his goodness has Inthrald
my heart,) neglect me now, 'cause I neglected him, when my fresh griefs
enforced me? If he do I must confess it but a just revenge: and so as long as
grief shall give me leave, I Will patiently endure it


But you shall not, you have endured beyond a Woman's strength, and shall endure
no longer. Mr. Doctor, you are the man must Cure her


Discovers himself, -- Beauteous Lady, 'twas your command I should not trouble
you with any tedious Love-suit; and you see I Have done what you enjoined me, now
I hope, I have your voluntary grant


I am now what Noble Bellingham shall please to make me.


No doubt but he will make much of thee, Sister, will thou not, Knight? My brave
Sir, of a thousand per annum


She Is now my own, and in this union, Sir, the best delights that her desires
would have, are mine, my own, and I shall so pursue 'um


The news with you?


Your Tenant Thrashard having information you and your Lady, were come to visit
your melancholy Sister, By way of thanks and gratitude for your last kindness,
has brought some of his Neighboring Shepherds, to present you with a Dance


He Is welcome, and if it be no trouble to you, Sister, give them admittance,


You may command me, Brother.


Charming Beauty, you whose Eyes
Delight in love and sacrifice:
Since your Glories shine so bright,
Let no sorrows make it night,
Banish all the griefs away,
While delights about you play.
For the Pleasures of youth, and the Joys of your Bliss,
Is to Frolic, Admire, to Revel, and Kiss.
Cho. For the, etc.
The sweets of your life, on that Union does wait,
Immortalized Joys are the blessings of Fate:
The Gods though made drunk with their pleasures above,
Think nothing Diviner, than that of your Love;
For love to excess, by enjoyment made strong,
Makes Mortals immortally frolic along,
In delights uncontroul d, like the powers above,
We surfeit and faint with the pleasures of love.
Cho. In delights, etc.
Each passionate look, and each melting embrace,
Each glory attending the charms of your face,
So subtly attracts, and so strongly commands,
We are slaves being free, and free when in bands.
Unkindness in frowns, the mandate of hate,
Makes Hell of what Heaven Decreed for our fate.
But you in this Empire so tutelar prove,
That Angels are subjects, and fight for your love.
Cho. But you in, etc.
Tenant and Friends, we thank you, and assure your selves it shall not go
unrewarded: but now to Church; nay we will not lose a minute


I beseech you stay a little, there is more mirth in your way, and such as I
dare promise will be worth the looking on: see, it appears


Who Is this, Mr. Rash?


The same, an't please you.


Your suit continued still, Sir?


I have turned up another suit now, Sir.


Your Wife!


Even so, Sir.


Verily so, Sir. -- Do not you know me, Lady?


Truth, not I.


Nor you, nor you, nor you?


We know thee not. What art thou?


This it is to put off our vain and superfluous colors, and to walk as becomes
the zealously metamorphos'd. I was your creature, Lady


How? my creature!


In the phrase of the world 'twas so, but I am now my own, yet verily I do err,
for no wife is her own disposer, verily none, for we, to affirm sincerely, are
but members of our head, the man our spouse and our superior


How, Bab?


The same, believe me.


How comes she to speak in the nose so?


The tone of the Brethren; but what do you think of this member, Bab?


Though begot, and conceived in vanity, yet being born in the state of
Matrimony, the offense may no doubt be remitted, and the innocent in time may
prove a most zealous member


And what think you, Sir?


I think as my wife thinks, for man and wife are one.


Verily you have said, and said like a zealous husband.


Much joy betide your Worship.


I thank you. For having this Beauty, I have all the joys my auspicious Stars
could give me


Well, Gregory, if you do hang your self --


Why, if he does, he does, we cannot help it, we are now man and wife.


For better, for worse.


Then for better, for worse, I will keep her; why there is another Rival of
mine, Sir Oliver; say he should take the same Journey, and go to Heaven in a
halter after him, can I help it


I confess you cannot, thank you, Mr. Plush.


I did but say, if you should, Sir.


No, though the loss be somewhat grievous to me, the sorrow shall not go so
deep, she is yours


As sure as the Church can make her.


What must be, must be, Sir; much joy betide you.


Thank you.


Now, Lady, in spite of all my Rivals, you are mine.


I am, Sir.


I know you are, and thereupon --


Not a kiss, till you come to your Chamber, and then she is your own all over.


It Is enough: now if my Father would but die once.


When Plush shall hear of this, he will hang himself.


If he do make a wry mouth at the match, I cannot help it, I should not do so
by him though

Save you, Gentlemen, we have the Lady.


We have the Lady, Gentlemen.


Is my Sister divided between you?


You cannot both have the Lady.


Alas, poor Gregory.


Alas, poor Plush.


Alas, poor Coxcombs: here is a coil indeed about a worthless shadow: what am I,
Sir


Alas, poor Gregory, -- Alas poor Plush.


Why, who have I then?


Why, who do you think you have? this is no Ivy-bush, nor I an Owl. Do You stare
upon me


My daughter Gillian!


What my sister Gillian! I thought by her scolding, she would be a Lady.


Are you my wife?


I cannot tell, how do you think, Sir, ha?


Come, Sir, be contented, she is young and handsome, and no doubt will prove a
fortune to you. But what say you, Sir


Why, I say, I know not what to say, she is not very old, is she?


In her Hood, some fifty, but in some other dressings she has, she may pass for
a thing of twenty


Here be some Gutters, Channels, and long Lanes, but being filled up with a
little Plaster of Paris, the face may pass


For a Paris-Garden face it may, Sir.


Come, never be melancholy, you shall find a woman of me, I Will warrant you.


Thou speak like a good old Gentlewoman. Well, an my wife would but die once.


How, sweetheart? your Father.


I know what I said, I Will warrant you, if my wife would but die once.


Come, you are so melancholy; why here is a man suffers as much as you* or you,
Mr. Plush and yet you see he is patient


I thought I had married a Lady too, but by Lady there is no such matter, we
must be contented now though


You that languish'd so long for those whom you find,
Have kindness for you, like the rest of mankind,
Though Love and that cheat no man can endure,
Yet be constant and kind, tho they are false and unsure,
For in time you will have something to ease a sad heart,
The pleasure to think how your Rivals do smart.
Here Is a Brother, a Fop, and a country Clown;
A Sister, a Scold, and a Jilt of the Town:
These Babbies of Grace, to be faithful, as yet,
Resolve to debauch, by the Rules of the Writ.
To increase without fear of a monstrous preamble,
And hold forth to all they shall meet in their ramble.
To be faithful and true, are the Rules they admire:
To oblige every Brother, and quench every fire,
These Lambs of a Fold, like young Adamites move,
Make Text their enjoyment, Religion their love:
In a Pulpit they will melt, like a Spark in a Coach,
Thump the Cushion and Preach, though they are big with debauch.
You may abuse the faithful, who are big with Grace and Labor, and rail
against those careful Shepherds, who strive with the sweat of their brows to
keep their Flocks from straying, you may. --


The Token I remember, and that after this Ladies Marriage I gave it thee, with
a promise, If ever I lived to come ashore again, never to marry other


You did, Sir.


Heaven, I see, is just in every thing, and would not let me violate that Faith
I had given up to thee. And since it has preserved me from a Fate severe as was
my Merit: thus I make good my promise; Which is thy Father


This, Sir.


Then to him I kneel, hoping he will be so truly kind to give me his consent.


Captain, take it, you are a worthy Gentleman, and much deserve a better
fortune


What another Lady of the Family of the Thrashards! nay then I feel Honor
creeps on apace, and I may be a Lord. Your servant, Brothers; nay I am bold,
but it is my ambition to be acquainted with Gentlemen


And you are welcome, we both are Brothers now.


Why, God a mercy, Captain, now I love you dearly; and to express how much I
dote upon you, let us have a Dance, and then we will move to Church, where I will
play the Father


I thank you, Sir.


Now, Gentlemen, let us go.
Never was day so doubly blessed before,
Contemned by one, I found what I adore.
Double Affection too does crown the End:
Finding a Mistress, I have found a Friend.

Honor to such excess, in you I Have found,
Love, Virtue, Merit, it at once has crowned.
Your Generosity so highly moved,
By all the World you ought to be beloved.
When friendship to such height does act its part,
At once you conquer, body, soul, and heart.

YOu did expect some bawdy Farce to day,
Some glorious nonsense, or a thundering Play,
Enough to fright the hussing Wits away:
But you are cheated, and instead of either,
We Have tired your patience with Harangue of neither.
How pleasant 'twas to see some sleep in the Pit,
Some serious Judges, and there dream of Wit,
Awake, I Am sure they never thought of it.
Some in a corner amongst the numerous crowd
It seems were pleased, they laughed so monstrous loud;
'Twas not at Play, but Beauty under cloud.
D -- me, says one* she is handsome, wondrous fair;
Another, rot the Jilt, if two compare
In notes together, all the Pit despair.
Then humming round the creature yet unknown,
They court her to-unmask, that being done,
Their stomachs nauseate, and their love grows cool,
And all retire from unregarded fool.
We have no charms to attract your face this way,
No gaudy Clothes, nor Scenes to grace our Play.
Here you must be content with yea and nay.
But let that pass: be kind, Gallants, for fear,
Through me your double dealings do appear.
I Am grown precise, a Sister, and a Saint,
Laid by the Trade of Chambermaid and Paint.
The lewd vocation of informing Cully,
Your Miss admits the Amors of such a Bully.
They meet in private, and to tell you truly,
This night the intrigue is done with Betty B --
Then Spark, despising all his Mistress charms,
Perhaps, takes me into his longing Arms;
With patience leaves what was before his right,
And all to shun the danger of the fight.
But roaring Huff for such affronts will cry,
D -- me, the Rascal and the Jilt shall die.
But this is past, I am a Convert grown,
Abhor the lewd devices of the Town.
Move as the humor moves, sometimes be bold,
A Shepherd may debauch in his own Fold.
The Lambs sometimes must play; should they be dull,
A Sister never would get her belly full.
Am I not happy then, in my new bands?
Gallants, do you confirm it with your hands.
Isee your looks prognosticate a storm,
And if you please, your Quaker shall reform.
Religious Players, in this wicked Age,
Appear like Devils, and disgrace the Stage:
Those serious Fops have ruined all our pains.
To shun our House will make a Saint of Haynes.

