THE MAGNETIC LADY: OR, HVMORS RECONCILED.

A COMEDY composed By BEN: JOHNSON.

I am lapides suus ardor agit ferrumque tenetur,
Illecebris. --
LONDON, Printed M.CD.XL.

CHORUS by way of Induction.

What do you lack, Gentlemen? what is it you lack? any fine Phansies, Figures,
Humors, Characters, Idaeas, Definitions of Lords, and Ladies? Waiting-women,
Parasites, Knights, Captains, Courtiers, Lawyers? what do you lack


A pretty prompt Boy for the Poetique Shop.


And a bold! where is one of your Masters, Sirrah, the Poet?

Which of 'hem? Sir we have diverse that drive that trade, now: Poets,
Poet'accios, Poetasters, Poetito's --


And all Haberdashers of small wit, I presume: we would speak with the Poet
of the day, Boy


Sir, he is not here. But, I have the dominion of the Shop, for this time,
under him, and can show you all the variety the Stage will afford for the
present


Therein you will express your own good parts, Boy.


And tie us two, to you, for the gentle office.


We are a pair of public persons (this Gentleman, and my self) that are
sent, thus coupled unto you upon state-busines


It concerns but the state of the Stage I hope!


O, you shall know that by degrees,


No man leaps into a business of state, without fourding first the state of the
business


We are sent unto you, indeed from the people.


The people! which side of the people?


The Venison side, if you know it, Boy.


That Is the left side. I had rather they had been the right.


So they are. Not the Paces, or grounds of your people, that (...) in the
oblique caves and wedges of your house, your sinful sixe-penny Mechanics --


But the better, and braver sort of your people! Plush and Velvet-outsides!
that stick your house round like so many eminences --


Of clothes, not understandings? They are at pawn. Well, I take these as a
part of your people though; what bring you to me from these people


You have heard, Boy, the ancient Poets had it in their purpose, still to
please this people


I, their chief aim was --


Populo ut placerent: (if he understands so much.)


Quas fecissent fabulas.) I understand that, sin' I learned Terence, in the
third form at Westminster: go on Sir


Now, these people have employed us to you, in all their names, to entreat an
excellent Play from you


For they have had very mean ones, from this shop of late, the Stage as you
call it


Troth, Gentlemen, I have no wares, which I dare thrust upon the people with
praise. But this, such as it is, I will venture with your people, your gay
gallant people: so as you, again, will undertake for them, that they shall
know a good Play when they hear it; and will have the conscience, and
ingenuity beside, to confess it


We Will pass our words for that: you shall have a brace of us to engage our
selves


You Will tender your names, Gentlemen, to our book then?


Yes, here is Mr. Probee; A man of most powerful speech, and parts to persuade.


And Mr. Damplay, will make good all he undertakes.


Good Mr. Probee, and Mr. Damplay! I like your securities: whence do you write
yourselves


Of London, Gentlemen: but Knights brothers, and Knights friends, I assure you.


And Knights fellow's too. Every Poet writes Squire now.


You are good names! very good men, both of you! I accept you.


And what is the Title of your Play, here? The Magnetic Lady?


Yes, Sir, an attractive title the Author has given it.


A Magnete, I warrant you.


O, no, from Magnus, Magna, Magnum.


This Gentleman, has found the true magnitude --


Of his portall, or entry to the work, according to Vitruvius.


Sir all our work is done without a Portall -- or Vitruvius. In Foro, as a
true Comoedy should be. And what is conceald within, is brought out, and made
present by report


We see not that always observed, by your Authors of these times: or scarce
any other


Where it is not at all known, how should it be observed? The most of those
your people call Authors, never dreamt of any Decorum, or what was proper in
the Scene; but grope at it, in the dark, and feel, or fumble for it; I speak
it, both with their leave, and the leave o'your people


But, why Humors reconciled? I would feign know?


I can satisfy you there, too: if you will. But, perhaps you desire not to be
satisfied


No? why should you conceive so, Boy?


My conceit is not ripe, yet: I Will tell you that anon. The Author, beginning his
studies of this kind, with every man in his Humor; and after, every man out of
his Humor; and since, continuing in all his Plays, especially those of the
Comic thread, whereof the New-Inne was the last, some recent humors still, or
manners of men, that went along with the times, finding himself now near the
close, or shutting up of his Circle, has phant'sied to himself, in Idaea,
this Magnetic Mistress. A Lady a brave bountiful Housekeeper, and a virtuous
Widow: who having a young Neice, ripe for a man and marriageable, he makes
that his Center attractive, to draw thither a diversity of Guests, all persons
of different humors to make up his Perimiter. And this he has called Humors
reconciled


A bold undertaking! and far greater, then the reconciliation of both
Churches, the quarrel between humors having been much the ancienter, and,
in my poor opinion, the root of all Schism, and Faction, both in Church and
Commonwealth


Such is the opinion of many wisemen, that meet at this shop still; but how he
will speed in it, we cannot tell, and he himself (it seems) lessecares. For
he will not be entreated by us, to give it a Prologue. He has lost too much
that way already, he says. He will not woo the gentile ignorance so much.
But careless of all vulgar censure, as not depending on common approbation,
he is confident it shall super-please judicious Spectators, and to them he
leaves it to work, with the rest by example, or otherwise


He may be deceived in that, Boy: Few follow examples now, especially, if they
be good


The Play is ready to begin, Gentlemen, I tell you, lest you might defraud the
expectation of the people, for whom you are Delegates! Please you take a couple
of Seats, and plant your selves, here, as near my standing as you can: Fly
every thing (you see) to the mark, and censure it; freely. So, you interrupt
not the Series, or thread of the Argument, to break or pucker it, with
unnecessary questions. For, I must tell you, (not out of mine own Dictamen,
but the Authors,) A good Play, is like a skeene of silk: which, if you take by
the right end, you may wind off, at pleasure, on the bottom, or card of your
discourse, in a tale, or so; how you will: But if you light on the wrong end,
you will pull all into a knot, or else-lock; which nothing but the sheers, or a
candle will undo, or separate


Stay! who be these, I pray you?


Because it is your first question, and (these be the prime persons) it would
in civility require an answer: but I have heard the Poet affirm, that to be
the most unlucky Scene in a Play, which needs an Interpreter; especially, when
the Auditory are awake: and such are you, he presumes. Ergo


Welcome good Captain Ironside, and brother;
You shall along with me. I Am lodged hard by,
Here at a noble Ladies house in the street,
The Lady Loadstones (one will bid us welcome)
Where there are Gentlewomen, and male Guests,
Of several humors, carriage, constitution,
Profession too: but so diametrall
One to another, and so much opposed,
As if I can but hold them all together,
And draw 'hem to a sufferance of themselves,
But till the Dissolution of the Dinner;
I shall have just occasion to believe
My wit is magisteriall; and our selves
Take infinite delight, in the success.

Troth, brother Compass, you shall pardon me;
I love not so to multiply acquaintance
At a meals cost, 'twill take off of my freedom
So much: or bind me to the least observance.

Why Ironside, you know I am a Scholar,
And part a Soldier; I have been employed,
By some the greatest Statesmen of the kingdom,
These many years: and in my time conversed
With sundry humors, suiting so my self
To company, as honest men, and knaves,
Good-fellowes, Hypocrites, all sorts of people,
Though never so divided in themselves,
Have studied to agree still in the usage,
And handling of me (which has been fair too.)

Sir I confess you to be one well read
In men, and manners; and that, usually,
The most ungoverned persons, you being present,
Rather subject themselves unto your censure,
Then give you least occasion of distaste,
By making you the subject of their mirth:
But (to deal plainly with you, as a brother)
When ever I distrust i'my own valor:
I Will never bear me on another wit,
Or offer to bring off, or save my self
On the opinion of your Judgment, gravitie,
Discretion, or what else. But (being away)
You'are sure to have lesse-wit-worke, gentle brother,
My humor being as stubborn, as the rest,
And as unmannageable.

You do mistake
My Caract of your friendship, all this while!
Or at what rate I reckon your assistance
Knowing by long experience, to such Animals,
Halfe-hearted Creatures, as these are, your Fox, there,
Vnkenneld with a Choleric, ghastly aspect,
Or two or three comminatory Terms,
Would run their fears to any hole of shelter,
Worth a days laughter! I am for the sport:
For nothing else.

But, brother, I have seen
A Coward, meeting with a man as valiant
As our St. George (not knowing him to be such,
Or having least opinion that he was so)
Set to him roundly, I, and swindge him soundly:
And in the virtue of that error, having
Once overcome, resolved for ever after
To err; and think no person, nor no creature
More valiant then himself.

I think that too.
But, Brother, (could I over entreat you)
I have some little plot upon the rest
If you would be contented, to endure
A sliding reprehension, at my hands,
To hear your self, or your profession glanced at
In a few sleighting terms: It would beget
Me such a maine Authority, of the by:
And do your self no dis-repute at all!

Compass, I know that universal causes
In nature produce nothing; but as meeting
Particular causes, to determine those,
And specify their acts. This is a piece
Of Oxford Science, stays with me ere since
I left that place; and I have often found
The truth thereof, in my private passions:
For I do never feel my self perturb'd
With any general words against my profession,
Unless by some smart stroke upon my self
They do awake, and stir me: Else, to wise
And well experienced men, words do but signify;
They have no power; save with dull Grammarians,
Whose souls are naught, but a Syntaxis of them.

Here comes our Parson, Parson Palate here
A venerable youth! I must salute him,
And a great Clerk! he is going to the Ladies,
And though you see him thus, without his Cope,
I dare assure you, he is our Parish Pope!
God save my reverend Clergy, Parson Palate.

The witty Mr. Compass! how is it, with you?

My Lady stays for you, and for your Council,
Touching her Neice Mrs. Placentia Steel!
Who strikes the fire of full fourteen, to day,
Ripe for a husband.

I, she chimes, she chimes,
Saw you the Doctor Rut, the house Physician?
He Is sent for too.

To Council? 'time yo' were there.
Make haste, and give it a round quick dispatch:
That we may go to dinner betimes, Parson:
And drink a health, or two more, to the business.

This is a strange put-off! a reverend youth,
You use him most surreverently me thinks!
What? call you him? Palate Please? or Parson Palate?

All Is one, but shorter! I can gi'you his Character.
He, is the Prelate of the Parish, here;
And governes all the Dames; appoints the cheer;
Writes down the bills of fare; pricks all the Guests;
Makes all the matches and the marriage feasts
Within the ward; draws all the parish wills;
Designs the Legacies; and strokes the Gills
Of the chief Mourners; And (who ever lacks)
Of all the kindred, he has first his blacks.
Thus holds he weddings up, and burials,
As his maine tithing; with the Gossips stals,
Their pewes; He Is top still, at the public mess;
Comforts the widow, and the fatherless,
In funeral Sack! Sits 'bove the Alderman!
For of the Ward-mote Quest, he better can,
The mystery, then the Levitick Law:
That piece of Clark-ship does his Vestry awe
He is as he conceives himself, a fine
Well furnished, and apparaled Divine.

Who made this EPIGRAMME, you?

No, a great Clarke
As any'is of his bulk. (Ben: Ionson) made it.

But what is the other Character, DOCTOR Rut?

The same man made 'hem both: but his is shorter,
And not in rhyme, but blancks. I Will tell you that, too.
Rut is a young Physician to the family:
That, letting God alone, ascribes to nature
More then her share; licentious in discourse,
And in his life a professed Voluptary;
The slave of money, a Buffon in manners;
Obscene in language; which he vents for wit;
Is saucy in his Logicks, and disputing,
Is any thing but civil, or a man.
See here they are! and walking with my Lady,
In consultation, before the door;
We will slip in, as if we saw 'hem not.

I, it is his fault, she is not bestowed,
My brother Interests.

Who, old Sir Moath?

He keeps off all her Suitors, keeps the portion,
Still in his hands: and will not part withal,
On any terms.

Hinc illae lachrymae;
Thence flows the cause of the maine grievance.

That
It is a maine one! how much is the portion?

No petty sum.

But sixteen thousand pound.

He should be forced, Madam, to lay it down.
When is it payable?

When she is married.

Marry her, marry her, Madam.

Get her married.
Loose not a day, an hour --

Not a minute.
Pursue your project real. Mr. Compass,
Advised you, too. He is the perfect Instrument,
Your Ladyship should sail by.

Now, Mr. Compass
Is a fine witty man; I saw him go in, now.

Is he gone in?

Yes, and a Fether with him,
He seems a Soldier.

Some new Suitor, Madam.

I am beholden to him: he brings ever
Variety of good persons to my table,
And I must thank him, though my brother Interest
Dislike of it a little.

He likes nothing
That runs your way.

Troth, and the other cares not.
He Will go his own way, if he think it right.

He Is a true friend! and there is Mr. Practice,
The fine young man of Law comes to the house:
My brother brooks him not, because he thinks
He is by me assigned for my Neice:
He will not hear of it.

Not of that ear:
But yet your Ladyship does wisely in it --

'Twill make him to lay down the portion sooner,
If he but dream you will march her with a Lawyer.

So Mr. Compass says. It is between
The Lawyer, and the Courtier, which shall have her.

Who, Sir Diaphanous Silke-worme?

A fine Gentleman.
Old Mr. Silke-wormes Heir.

And a near Courtier,
Of a most elegant thread

And so my Gossip
Polish assures me. Here she comes! good Polish
Welcome in troth! How do thou gentle Polish?

Who Is this?

Dame Polish, her shee-Parasite,
Her talking, soothing, sometime governing Gossip.

Your Ladyship is still the Lady Loadstone
That draws, and draws unto you, Guests of all sorts:
The Courtiers, and the Soldiers, and the Scholars,
The Travelers, Physicians, and Divines,
As Doctor Ridley writ, and Doctor Barlow?
They both have wrote of you, and Mr. Compass.

We mean, they shall write more, ere it be long.

Alas, they are both dead, and 't please you; But,
Your Ladyship means well, and shall mean well,
So long as I live. How does your fine Neice?
My charge, Mistress Placentia Steel?

She is not well.

Not well?

Her Doctor says for

Not very well; she cannot shoot at Buts.
Or manage a great Horse, but she can cranch
A sack of small coal! eat you lime, and hair,
Soap-ashes, Loame, and has a dainty spice
OF the green sickness!

'Od shield!

Or the Dropsy!
A toy, a thing of nothing. But my Lady, here
Her noble Aunt.

She is a noble Aunt!
And a right worshipful Lady, and a virtuous;
I know it well!

Well, if you know it, peace.

Good sister Polish hear your betters speak.

Sir I will speak, with my good Ladies leave,
And speak, and speak again; I did bring up
My Ladies Neice, Mrs. Placentia Steel,
With my own Daughter (who is Placentia too)
And waits upon my Lady, is her woman:
Her Ladyship well knows Mrs. Placentia
Steel (as I said) her curious Neice, was left
A Legacy to me; by Father, and Mother
With the Nurse, Keep, that tended her: her Mother
She died in Childbed of her, and her Father
Lived not long after: for he loved her Mother!
They were a godly couple! yet both di'd,
(As we must all.) No creature is immortal;
I have heard our Pastor say; no, not the faithful!
And they did die (as I said) both in one month.

Sure she is not long lived, if she spend breath thus.


And did bequeath her, to my care, and hand,
To polish, and bring up. I molded her,
And fashioned her, and formed her; she had the sweat
Both of my brows and brains. My Lady knows it
Since she could write a quarter old.

I know not
That she could write so early, my good Gossip.
But I do know she was so long your care,
Till she was twelve year old; that I called for her,
And took her home, for which I thank you Polish,
And am beholden to you.

I sure thought
She had a Lease of talking, for nine lives --

It may be she has.

Sir sixteen thousand pound
Was then her portion! for she was, indeed,
Their only child! and this was to be paid
Upon her marriage, so she married still
With my good Ladies liking here, her Aunt:
(I heard the Will read) Mr. Steel her father,
The world condemned him to be very rich,
And very hard, and he did stand condemned
With that vain world, till, as 'twas 'prov'd, after,
He left almost as much more to good uses
In Sir Moath Interests hands, my Ladies brother,
Whose sister he had married: He holds all
In his close gripe. But Mr. Steel, was liberal,
And a fine man; and she a dainty Dame,
And a religious, and a bountiful --

You knew her Mr. Compass?

Spare the torture,
I do confess without it.

And her husband,
What a fine couple they were? and how they lived?

Yes.


And loved together, like a pair of Turtles?

Yes.


And feasted all the Neighbors?

Take her off
Some body that has mercy.

O he knows her,
It seems!

Or any measure of compassion:
Doctors, if you be Christians, undertake
One for the soul, the other for the body!

She would dispute with the Doctors of Divinity
At her own table! and the Spitle Preachers!
And find out the Armenians.

The Armenians?


I say the Armenians.

Nay, I say so too!

So Mr. Polish called 'hem, the Armenians!

And Medes, and Persians, did he not?

Yes, he knew 'hem,
And so did Mistress Steel! she was his Pupil!
The Armenians, he would say, were worse then Papists!
And then the Persians, were our Puritanes,
Had the fine piercing wits!

And who, the Medes?

The middle men, the Lukewarm Protestants?

Out, out.


Sir she would find them by their branching*
Their branching sleeves, brancht cassocks, and brancht doctrine,
Beside their Texts.

Stint Karlin: I Will not hear,
Confute her Parson.

I respect no Persons,
Chaplins, or Doctors, I will speak.

Yes, so't be reason,
Let her.

Death, she cannot speak reason.

Nor sense, if we be Masters of our senses!

What mad woman have they got, here, to bate?

Sir I am mad, in truth, and to the purpose;
And cannot but be mad; to hear my Ladies
Dead sister slighted, witty Mrs. Steel!

If she had a wit, Death has gone near to spoil it,
Assure your self.

She was both witty, and zealous,
And lighted all the Tinder of the truth,
(As one said) of Religion, in our Parish:
She was too learned to live long with us!
She could the Bible in the holy tongue:
And read it without pricks: had all her Masoreth;
Knew Burton, and his Bull; and scribe Prin-Gent!
Fraesto-be-gon: and all the Pharisees.

Dear Gossip,
Be you gone, at this time, too, and vouchsafe
To see your charge, my Neice.

I shall obey
If your wise Ladyship think fit: I know,
To yield to my Superiors.

A good woman!
But when she is impertinent, grows earnest,
A little troublesome, and out of season:
Her love, and zeal transport her.

I am glad,
That any thing could port her hence. We now
Have hope of dinner, after her long grace.
I have brought your Ladyship a hungry Guest, here,
A Soldier, and my brother Captain Ironside:
Who being by custom grown a Sanguinarie,
The solemn, and adopted son of slaughter:
Is more delighted in the chase of an enemy,
An execution of three days, and nights;
Then all the hope of numerous succession,
Or happiness of Issue could bring to him.

He is no Suitor then?

So't should seem.

And, if he can get pardon at heavens hand,
For all his murders, is in as good case
As a new christened Infant: (his employments
Continued to him, without Interruption;
And not allowing him, or time, or place
To commit any other sin, but those)
Please you to make him welcome for a meal, Madam.

The nobleness of his profession makes
His welcome perfect: though your course description
Would seem to fully it.

Never, where a beam
Of so much favor does illustrate it,
Right knowing Lady.

She has cured all well.

And he has fitted well the Complement.

No; here they come! the prime Magnetic Guests
Our Lady Loadstone so respects: the Artick!
And the Antartick! Sir Diaphanous Silke-worme!
A Courtier extraordinary; who by diet
Of meats, and drinks; his temperate exercise;
Choice music; frequent bathes; his horary shifts
Of Shirts and Wast-coats; means to immortalize
Mortality it self; and makes the essence
Of his whole happiness the trim of Court.

I thank you Mr. Compass, for your short Encomiastick.


It is much in little, Sir.


Concise, and quick: the true style of an Orator.


But Mr. Practice here, my Ladies Lawyer!
Or man of Law: (for that is the true writing)
A man so dedicate to his profession,
And the preferments go along with it;
As scarce the thundering bruit of an invasion,
Another eighty eight, threatening his Country
With ruin; would no more work upon him,
Then Syracusa's Sack, on Archimede:
So much he loves that Nightcap! the Bench-gowne!
With the broad Guard o'th back! These show
A man betrothed unto the study of our Laws!

Which you but think the crafty impositions,
Of subtle Clerks, feats of fine understanding,
To abuse Clots, and Clownes with, Mr. Compass,
Having no ground in nature, to sustain it
Or light, from those clear causes: to the inquiry
And search of which, your Mathematical head,
Has so devow'd it self.

Tut, all men are
Philosophers, to their inches. There Is within,
Sir Interest, as able a Philosopher,
In buying, and selling! has reduced his thrifte,
To certain principles, and i'that method!
As he will tell you instantly, by Logorythmes,
The utmost profit of a stock employed:
(Be the Commodity what it will) the place,
Or time, but causing very, very little,
Or, I may say, no paralaxe at all,
In his pecuniary observations!
He has brought your Neices portion with him, Madam;
At least the man that must receive it; Here
They come negotiating the affair;
You may perceive the Contract in their faces;
And read th'indenture: If you would sign 'hem. So.

What is he, Mr. Compass?

A Vi-politique!
Or a sub-aiding Instrument of State!
A kind of a laborious Secretary
To a great man! (and likely to come on)
Full of attendance! and of such a stride
In business politic, or oeconomick,
As, well, his Lord may stoop t'advise with him,
And be prescribed by him, in affairs
Of highest consequence, when he is dulled,
Or wearied with the less.

It Is Mr. Bias,
Lord Whach'um's Politic.

You know the man?

I have seen him wait at Court, there, with his Maniples
Of papers, and petitions.

He is one
That overrules though, by his authority
Of living there; and cares for no man else:
Neglects the sacred letter of the Law;
And holds it all to be but a dead heap,
Of civil institutions: the rest only
Of common men, and their causes, a farragoe,
Or a made dish in Court; a thing of nothing:

And that is your quarrel at him? a just plea.


I tell you sister Loadstone --

(Hang your ears
This way: and hear his praises, now Moath opens)

I have brought you here the very man! the Jewel
Of all the Court! close Mr. Bias! Sister,
Apply him to your side! or you may wear him
Here of your breast! or hang him in your ear!
He Is a fit Pendant for a Ladies tip!
A Chrisolite, a Gemme: the very Agat
Of State, and Polity: cut from the Quar
Of Macchiavel, a true Cornelian,
As Tacitus himself! and to be made
The brooch to any true State-cap in Europe!

You praise him brother, as you had hope to sell him.

No Madam, as he had hope to sell your Neice
Unto him.

'Ware your true jests, Mr. Compass;
They will not relish.

I will tell you, sister,
I cannot cry his Carract up enough:
He is unvaluable: All the Lords
Have him in that esteem, for his relations,
Corrant's, Avises, Correspondences
With this Ambassador, and that Agent! He
Will screw you out a Secret from a Statist --.

So easy, as some Cobbler worms a Dog.

And lock it in the Cabinet of his memory --.

Till 't turn a politic insect, or a Fly!
Thus long.

You may be merry Mr. Compass,
But though you have the reversion of an office,
You are not in it Sir.

Remember that.

Why, should that fright me; Mr. By --, from telling
Whose as you are?

Sir he is one, can do
His turns there: and deliver too his letters,
As punctually, and in as good a fashion,
As ere a Secretary can in Court.

Why, is it any matter in what fashion
A man deliver his letters, so he not open 'hem?

Yes, we have certain precedents in Court,
From which we never swerve, once in an age:
And (whatsoere he thinks) I know the Arts,
And Sciences do not directlier make
A Graduate in our Universities;
Then an habitual gravitie prefers
A man in Court.

Which by the truer style,
Some call a formal, flat servility.

Sir you may call it what you please. But we
(That tread the path of public businesses)
Know what a tacit shrug is, or a shrink;
The wearing the Callott; the politic hood:
And twenty other parerga, of the by,
You Seculars understand not: I shall trick him,
If his reversion came, in my Lords way.

What is that Mr. Practice? you sure know?
Mas' Compasses reversion?

A fine place
(Survey or of the Projects general)
I would I had it.

What is it worth?

O Sir,
A Nemo scit.

We Will think on it before dinner.

Now, Gentlemen, what censure you of our Protasis, or first Act?


Well, Boy, it is a fair Presentment of your Actors. And a handsome promise of
somewhat to come hereafter


But, there is nothing done in it, or concluded: Therefore I say, no Act.


A fine piece of Logic! Do you look, Mr. Damplay, for conclusions in a
Protesis? I thought the Law of Comedy had reserved to the Catastrophe: and that
the Epitasis, (as we are taught) and the Catastasis, had been interveening
parts, to have been expected. But you would have all come together it seems:
The Clock should strike five, at once, with the Acts


Why, if it could do so, it were well, Boy.


Yes, if the nature of a Clock were to speak, not strike. So, if a Child could
be borne, in a Play, and grow up to a man, in the first Scene, before he went
off the Stage: and then after to come forth a Squire, and be made a Knight:
and that Knight to travel between the Acts, and do wonders in the holy land
or else where; kill Paynims wild Boores, dun Cowes, and other Monsters; beget
him a reputation, and marry an Emperors Daughter: for his Mrs. Convert her
Fathers Country; and at last come home, lame and all to be laden with miracles


These miracles would please, I assure you: and take the People! For there be
of the People, that will expect miracles, and more then miracles from this Pen


Do they think this Pen can juggle? I would we had Hokospokos for 'hem then;
your People, or Travitanto Tudesko


Who Is that Boy?


Another Juggler, with a long name. Or that your expectors would be gone hence,
now, at the first Act; or expect no more hereafter, then they understand


Why so my peremptory Jack?


My name is John, indeed -- Because, who expect what is impossible, or beyond
nature, defraud themselves


Nay, there the Boy said well: They do defraud themselves indeed.


And therefore, Mr. Damplay, unless like a solemn Justice of wit, you will
damn our Play, unheard, or unexamin'd; I shall entreat your Mrs. Madam
Expectation, if she be among these Ladies, to have patience, but a pissing
while: give our Springs leave to open a little, by degrees: A Source of
ridiculous matter may break forth anon, that shall steep their temples, and
bathe their brains in laughter, to the fomenting of Stupiditie it self, and
the awaking any velvet Lethargy in the House


Why do you maintain your Poets quarrel so with velvet, and good clothes,
Boy? we have seen him in indifferent good clothes, ere now


And may do in better, if it please the King (his Master) to say Amen to it,
and allow it, to whom he acknowledges all. But his clothes shall never be the
best thing about him, though; he will have somewhat beside, either of humane
letters, or severe honesty, shall speak him a man though he went naked


He is beholden to you, if you can make this good, Boy.


Himself has done that, already, against Envy.


What Is your name Sir? or your Country?


John Try-gust my name: A Cornish youth, and the Poets Servant.


West-countrey breed, I thought, you were so bold.


Or rather saucy: to find out your palate, Mr. Damplay, Faith we do call a
Spade, a Spade, in Cornwall. If you dare damn our Play, in the wrong place, we
shall take heart to tell you so


Good Boy.


SWeet Mistress, pray you be merry: you are sure
To have a husband now.

I, if the store
Hurt not the choice.

Store is no sore, young Mistress,
My mother is wont to say.

And she will say wisely,
As any mouth in the Parish. Fix on one,
Fix upon one, good Mistress.

At this call, too,
Here Is Mr. Practice, who is called to the Bench
Of purpose.

Yes, and by my Ladies means --

It Is thought to be the man.

A Lawyers wife.

And a fine Lawyers wife.

Is a brave calling.

Sweet Mistress Practice!

Gentle Mistress Practice!

Fair, open Mistress Practice!

I, and close,
And cunning Mrs. Practice!

I not like that,
The Courtiers is the neater calling.

Yes,
My Lady Silke-worme.

And to shine in Plush.

Like a young night Crow, a Diaphanous Silkeworme.

Lady Diaphanous sounds most delicate!

Which would you choose, now Mistress?

Cannot tell.
The copy does confound one.

Here Is my Mother.

How now, my dainty charge, and diligent Nurse?
What were you chanting on? (

We were enchanting all; wishing a husband
For my young Mistress here. A man to please her.

She shall have a man, good Nurse, and must have a man:
A man, and a half, if we can choose him out:
We are all in Counsel within, and sit about it:
The Doctors, and the Scholars, and my Lady;
Who Is wiser then all us --. Where Is Mr. Needle?
Her Ladyship so lacks him to prick out
The man? How does my sweet young Mistress?
You look not well, me thinks! how do you, dear charge?
You must have a husband, and you shall have a husband;
There Is two put out to making for you: A third,
Your Uncle promises: But you must still
Be ruled by your Aunt: according to the will
Of your dead father, and mother (who are in heaven.)
Your Lady-Aunt has choice in the house for you:
We do not trust your Uncle; he would keep you
A Batchler still, by keeping of your portion:
And keep you not alone without a husband,
But in a sickness: I, and the green sickness,
The Maidens malady; which is a sickness:
A kind of a disease, I can assure you,
And like the Fish our Mariners call remora --.

A remora Mistress!

How now goody Nurse?
Dame Keep of Katernes? what? have you an oar
IN the Cockboat, 'cause you are a Saylors wife?
And come from Shadwell? I say a remora:
For it will stay a Ship, that is under Sail!
And stays are long, and tedious things to Maids!
And maidens are young ships, that would be sailing,
When they be rigged: wherefore is all their trim else?

True; and for them to be staid --.

The stay is dangerous:
You know it Mrs. Needle.

I know somewhat:
And can assure you, from the Doctors mouth,
She has a Dropsy; and must change the air,
Before she can recover.

Say you so, Sir?

The Doctor says so.

Says his worship so?
I warrant 'hem he says true, then; they sometimes
Are Soothsayers, and always cunning men.
Which Doctor was it?

Eeene my Ladies Doctor:
The neat house-Doctor: But a true stone-Doctor.

Why? hear you, Nurse? How comes this gear to pass?
This is your fault in truth: It shall be your fault,
And must be your fault: why is your Mistress sick?
She had her health, the while she was with me.

Alas good Mistress Polish, I am no Saint,
Much less, my Lady, to be urged give health,
Or sickness at my will: but to awaite
The stars good pleasure, and to do my duty.

You must do more then your duty, foolish Nurse:
You must do all you can; and more then you can,
More then is possible: when folks are sick,
Especially, a Mistress; a young Mistress.

Here Is Mr. Doctor himself, cannot do that

Doctor Doo-all can do it. Thence he is called so.

Whence? what is he called?

Doctor, do all you can,
I pray you, and beseech you, for my charge, here.

She Is my tendering Gossip, loves my Neice.

I know you can do all things, what you please, Sir,
For a young Damsel, my good Ladies Neice, here!
You can do what you list.

Peace Tiffany.

Especially in this new case, of the Dropsy.
The Gentlewoman (I do fear) is leven'd.

Leven'd? what is that?

Puffed, blown, and't please your worship.

What! Dark, by darker? What is blown? puffed? speak
English --

Tainted (and't please you) some do call it.
She swells, and swells so with it. --

Give her vent,
If she do swell. A Gimblet must be had:
It is a Tympanites she is troubled with;
There are three kinds: The first is Ana-sarca
Under the Flesh, a Tumor: that is not hers.
The second is Ascites, or Aquosus,
A watery humor: that is not hers neither.
But Tympanites (which we call the Drum)
A wind bombes in her belly, must be unbrac'd,
And with a Faucet, or a Peg, let out,
And she will do well: get her a husband.

Yes,

I say so Mr. Doctor, and betimes too.

As
Soon as we can: let her bear up to day,
Laugh, and keep company, at Gleeke, or Crimpe.

Your Ladyship says right, Crimpe, sure, will cure her.

Yes, and Gleeke too; peace Gossip Tittle-Tattle,
She must to morrow, down into the Country,
Some twenty mile; A Coach, and six brave Horses:
Take the fresh air, a month there, or five weeks:
And then return a Bride, up to the Town,
For any husband in the Hemisphere,
To chuck at; when she has dropped her Timpane.

Must she then drop it?

Thence, it is called a Dropsy.
The Timpanites is one spice of it;
A toy, a thing of nothing, a mere vapor:
I Will blow't away.

Needle, get you the Coach
Ready, against to morrow morning.

Yes Madam.

I Will down with her my self, and thank the Doctor.

We all shall thank him. But, dear Madam, think,
Resolve upon a man, this day.

I have done't.
To tell you true, (sweet Gossip;) here is none
But Master Doctor, he shall be of the Counsel:
The man I have designed her to, indeed,
Is Master Practice: he is a neat young man,
Forward, and growing up, in a profession!
Like to be some body, if the Hall stand!
And Pleading hold! A prime young Lawyers wife,
Is a right happy fortune.

And she bringing
So plentiful a portion, they may live
Like King, and Queen, at common Law together!
Sway Judges; guide the Courts; command the Clerks,
And fright the Evidence; rule at their pleasures,
Like petty Sovereigns in all cases.

O, that
Will be a work of time; she may be old
Before her husband rise to a chief Judge;
And all her flower be gone: No, no, a Lady
OF the first head I Would have her; and in Court:
The Lady Silk-worme, a Diaphanous Lady:
And be a Vi-countesse to carry all
Before her (as we say) her Gentleman Usher:
And cast off Pages, bare, to bid her Aunt
Welcome unto her honor, at her lodgings.

You say well, Ladies Gossip; if my Lady
Could admit that, to have her Neice precede her.

For that, I must consult mine own Ambition,
My zealous Gossip.

O, you shall precede her:
You shall be a Countess! Sir Diaphanous,
Shall get you made a Countess! Here he comes;
Has my voice certain: O fine Courtier!
O blessed man! the bravery pricked out,
To make my dainty charge, a Vi-countesse!
And my good Lady, her Aunt, Countess at large!

I tell thee Parson, if I get her, reckon
Thou have a friend in Court; and shall command
A thousand pound, to go on any errand,
For any Church preferment thou have a mind too.

I thank your worship: I will so work for you,
As you shall study all the ways to thank me:
I Will work my Lady, and my Ladies friends;
Her Gossip, and this Doctor; and Squire Needle,
And Mr. Compass, who is all in all:
The very Fly she moves by: He is one
That went to Sea with her husband, Sir John Loadstone,
And brought home the rich prizes: all that wealth
Is left her; for which service she respects him:
A dainty Scholar in the Mathematics;
And one she wholly imployes. Now Dominus Practice
Is yet the man (appointed by her Ladyship)
But there is a trick to set his cap awry:
If I know any thing; he has confessed
To me in private, that he loves another,
My Ladies woman, Mrs. Pleasance: therefore
Secure you of Rivalship.

I thank thee
My noble Parson: There Is five hundred pound
Waits on thee more for that.

Accoast the Neice:
Yonder she walks alone: I Will move the Aunt:
But here is the Gossip: she expects a morsel.
Have you nere a Ring, or toy to throw away?

Yes, here is a Diamont of some threescore pound,
I pray you give her that.

If she will take it.

And there is an Emerauld, for the Doctor too:
Thou Parson, thou shall coin me: I am thine.

Here Mr. Compass comes: Do you see my Lady?
And all the rest? how they do flutter about him!
He is the Oracle of the house, and family!
Now, is your time: go nick it with the Neice:
I will walk by; and hearken how the Chimes go.

Nay Parson, stand not off; you may approach:
This is no such hid point of State, we handle,
But you may hear it: for we are all of Counsel.
The gentle Mr. Practice, has dealt clearly,
And nobly with you, Madam.

Have you talked with him?
And made the overture?

Yes, first I moved
The business trusted to me, by your Ladyship,
IN your own words, almost your very Sillabes:
Save where my Memory trespassed against their elegance:
For which I hope your pardon. Then I enlarged
In my own homely style, the special goodness,
And greatness, of your bounty, in your choice,
And free conferring of a benefit,
So without ends, conditions, any tie
But his mere virtue, and the value of it,
To call him to your kindred, to your veins,
Insert him in your family, and to make him
A Nephew, by the offer of a Neice,
With such a portion; which when he had heard,
And most maturely acknowledged (as his calling
Tends all unto maturity) he returned
A thanks, as ample as the Courtesy,
(In my opinion) said it was a Grace,
Too great to be rejected, or accepted
By him! But as the terms stood with his fortune,
He was not to prevaricate, with your Ladyship,
But rather to require ingenious leave,
He might with the same love, that it was offered
Refuse it, since he could not with his honesty,
(Being he was engaged before) receive it.

The same he said to me.

And name the party.

He did, and he did not.

Come, leave your Schemes,
And fine Amphibolies, Parson.

You Will hear more.

Why, now your Ladyship is free to choose,
The Courtier Sir Diaphanous: he shall do it,
I Will move it to him my self.

What will you move to him?

The making you a Countess.

Stint, fond woman.
Know you the party Mr. Practice means?

No, but your Parson says he knows, Madam.

I fear he fables; Parson do you know
Where Mr. Practice is engaged?

I Will tell you!
But under seal, her Mother must not know:
It Is with your Ladyships woman, Mrs. Pleasance.

How!

He is not mad.

O hide the hideous secret
From her, she will trouble all else. You do hold
A Cricket by the wing.

Did he name Pleasance?
Are you sure Parson?

O it is true, your Mrs!
I find where your shoe wrings you, Mr. Compass:
But, you will look to him there.

Yes, here is Sir Moath,
Your brother, with his Bias, and the Party
Deep in discourse: 'twill be a bargain, and sale;
I see by their close working of their heads,
And running them together so in Council.

Will Mr. Practice be of Council against us?

He is a Lawyer, and must speak for his Fee,
Against his Father, and Mother, all his kindred;
His brothers, or his sisters: no exception
Lies at the Common Law. He must not alter
Nature for form, but go on in his path --
It may be he will be for us. Do not you
Offer to meddle, let them take their course:
Dispatch, and marry her off to any husband;
Be not you scrupulous; let who can have her:
So he lay down the portion, though he gueld it:
It will maintain the suit against him: somewhat,
Something in hand is better, then no birds.
He shall at last account, for the utmost farthing,
If you can keep your hand from a discharge.

Sir, do but make her worshipful Aunt a Countess,
And she is yours: her Aunt has worlds to leave you!
The wealth of six East Indian Fleets at least!
Her Husband, Sir John Loadstone, was the Governor
OF the Company. seven years.

And came there home,
Six Fleets in seven years?

I cannot tell,
I must attend my Gossip, her good Ladyship.

And will you make me a Vi-countesse too? For,
How do they make a Countess? in a Chair?
Or 'pon a bed?

Both ways, sweet bird, I Will show you.

The truth is, Mr. Practice, now we are sure
That you are off, we dare come on the bolder:
The portion left, was sixteen thousand pound,
I do confess it, as a just man should.
And call here Mr. Compass, with these Gentlemen,
To the relation: I will still be just.
Now for the profits every way arising,
It was the Donors wisdom, those should pay
Me for my watch, and breaking of my sleeps;
It is no petty charge, you know, that sum;
To keep a man awake, for fourteen year.

But (as you knew to use it in that time)
It would reward your waking.

That Is my industry;
As it might be your reading, study, and counsel;
And now your pleading, who denies it you?
I have my calling too. Well, Sir, the Contract
Is with this Gentleman, ten thousand pound.
(An ample portion, for a younger brother,
With a soft, tender, delicate rib of man's flesh,
That he may work like wax, and print upon.)
He expects no more then that sum to be tendered,
And he receive it: Those are the conditions.

A direct bargain, and sale in open market.


And what I have furnished him with all of the by,
To appear, or so: A matter of four hundred,
To be deduced upo' the payment --.

Right.
You deal like a just man still.

Draw up this
Good Mr. Practice, for us, and be speedy.

But here is a mighty gain Sir, you have made
Of this one stock! the principal first doubled,
In the first seven year; and that redoubled
In The next seven! beside six thousand pound,
There Is threescore thousand got in fourteen year,
After the usual rate of ten in the hundred,
And the ten thousand paid.

I think it be!


How will you escape the clamor, and the envy?


Let 'hem exclaim, and envy: what care I?
Their murmurs raise no blisters i'my flesh.
My moneys are my blood, my parents, kindred:
And he that loves not those, he is unnatural:
I am persuaded that the love of money
Is not a virtue, only in a Subject,
But might befit a Prince. And (were there need)
I find me able to make good the Assertion.
To any reasonable man's understanding.
And make him to confess it.

Gentlemen,
Doctors, and Scholars, yo'll hear this, and look for
As much true secular wit, and deep Lay-sense,
As can be shown on such a common place.

First, we all know the soul of man is infinite
I what it covets. Who desires knowledge,
Desires it infinitely. Who covets honor,
Covets it infinitely, It will be then
No hard thing, for a coveting man, to prove
Or to confess, he aims at infinite wealth.

His soul lying that way.


Next, every man
Is in the hope, or possibility
Of a whole world: this present world being nothing,
But the dispersed issue of first one:
And therefore I not see, but a just man
May with just reason, and in office ought
Propound unto himself.

An infinite wealth!
He bear the burden: Go you on Sir Moath.

Thirdly, if we consider man a member,
But of the body politic, we know,
By just experience, that the Prince has need
More of one wealthy, then ten fighting men.

There you went out of the road, a little from us.


And therefore, if the Princes aims be infinite,
It must be in that, which makes all.

Infinite wealth.


Fourthly, it is natural to all good subjects,
To set a price on money; more then fools
Ought on their Mrs. Picture; every piece
Fro' the penny to the twelve pence, being the Hieroglyphick,
And sacred Sculpture of the Sovereign.

A manifest conclusion, and a safe one.


Fifthly, wealth gives a man the leading voice,
At all conventions; and displaceth worth,
With general allowance to all parties:
It makes a trade to take the wall of virtue;
And the mere issue of a shop, right Honorable.
Sixthly, it does enable him that has it
To the performance of all real actions,
Referring him to himself still: and not binding
His will to any circumstance; without him;
It gives him precise knowledge of himself;
For, be he rich, he straight with evidence knows
Whether he have any compassion,
Or inclination unto virtue, or no;
Where the poor knave erroniously believes,
If he were rich, he would build Churches, or
Do such mad things. Seventhly, your wise poor men
Have ever been contented to observe
Rich Fools, and so to serve their turns upon them:
Subjecting all their wit to the others wealth.
And become Gentlemen Parasites, Squire Bauds,
To feed their Patrons honorable humors.
Eighthly, it is certain that a man may leave
His wealth, or to his Children, or his friends;
His wit he cannot so dispose, by Legacy?
As they shall be a Harrington the better for it.

He may intaile a Jest upon his house, though:

To be told after him.

As you have done here?
T'invite your friend, and brother to a feast,
Where all the Guests are so mere heterogene,
And strangers, no man knows another, or cares
If they be Christians, or Mahumetans!
That here are met.

Is It any thing to you brother,
To know Religions more then those you fight for?

Yes, and with whom I eat. I may dispute,
And how shall I hold argument with such,
I neither know their humors, nor their heresies;
Which are religions now, and so received?
Here Is no man among these that keeps a servant,
To'inquire his Master of: yet in the house,
I hear it buzzed, there are a brace of Doctors;
A Fool, and a Physician: with a Courtier,
That feeds on mulbery leaves, like a true Silkeworme:
A Lawyer, and a mighty Money-Baud,
Sir Moath! has brought his politic Bias with him:
A man of a most animadverting humor:
Who, to indeare himself unto his Lord,
Will tell him, you and I, or any of us,
That here are met, are all pernicious spirits,
And men of pestilent purpose, meanly affected
Unto the State we live in: and beget
Himself a thanks, with the great men of the time,
By breeding Jealouses in them of us,
Shall cross our fortunes, frustrate our endeavors,
Twice seven years after: And this trick be called
Cutting of throats, with a whispering, or a penknife.
I must cut his throat now: I Am bound in honor,
And by the Law of arms, to see it done;
I dare to do it; and I dare profess
The doing of it: being to such a Rascal,
Who is the common offense grown of mankind;
And worthy to be torn up from society.

You shall not do it here, Sir.


Why? will you
Entreat your self, into a beating for him,
My courteous brother? If you will, have at you,
No man deserves it better (now I think on it)
Then you: that will keep consort with such Fiddlers,
Pragmatick Flies, Fools, Publicanes, and Moathes:
And leave your honest, and adopted brother.

'Best raise the house upon him, to secure us;
He Will kill us all!

I love no blades in belts.


Nor I.


Would I were at my shop again,
In Court, safe stowed up, with my politic bundels.

How they are scattered!

Run away like Cimici,
Into the cranies of a rotten bed-stead.

I told you such a passage would disperse 'hem,
Although the house were their Fee-simple in Law,
And they possessed of all the blessings in it.

Pray heaven they be not frighted from their stomachs:
That so my Ladies Table be disfurnish'd
Of the provisions!

No, the Parsons calling
By this time, all the covey again, together.
Here comes good tidings! Dinners of the board.

Stay Mrs. Pleasance, I must ask you a question:
Have you any suites in Law?

I, Mr. Compass?

Answer me briefly, it is dinner time.
They say you have retained brisk Mr. Practice
Here, of your Council; and are to be joined
A Patentee with him.

In what? who says so?
You are disposed to jest.

No, I am in earnest.
It is given out in the house so, I assure you;
But keep your right to your self, and not acquaint
A common Lawyer with your case. If he
Once find the gap; a thousand will leap after.
I Will tell you more anon.

This Riddle shows
A little like a Love-trick, of one face,
If I could understand it. I will study it.

But whom does your Poet mean now by this -- Mr. Bias? what Lords Secretary,
does he purpose to personate, or perstringe


You might as well ask me, what Alderman, or Aldermans Mate, he meant by Sir
Moath Interest? or what eminent Lawyer, by the ridiculous Mr. Practice? who
has rather his name invented for laughter, then any offense, or injury it can
stick on the reverend Professors of the Law: And so the wise ones will think


It is an insidious Question, Brother Damplay! Iniquity it self would not have
urged it. It is picking the Lock of the Scene; not opening it the fair way
with a Key. A Play, though it apparel, and present vices in general, flies
from all particularities in persons. Would you ask of Plantus, and Terence,
(if they both lived now) who were Davus, or Pseudolus in the Scene? who
Pyrgopolinices, or Thraso? who Euclio or Menedemus


Yes, he would: And inquire of Martial, or any other Epigrammatist, whom he
meant by Titius, or Seius (the common John a Noke, or John a Style) under whom
they note all vices, and errors taxable to the Times? As if there could not be
a name for a Folly fitted to the Stage, but there must be a person in nature,
found out to own it


Why, I can phant'sie a person to my self Boy, who shall hinder me?


And, in not publishing him, you do no man an injury. But if you will utter
your own ill meaning on that person, under the Authors words, you make a
Libell of his Comoedy


O, he told us that in a Prologue, long since.


If you do the same reprehensible ill things, still the same reprehension will
serve you, though you heard it before: They are his own words. I can invent no
better, nor he


It is the solemn vice of interpretation, that deformes the figure of many a
fair Scene, by drawing it awry; and indeed is the civil murder of most good
Plays: If I see a thing vively presented on the Stage, that the Glass of
custom (which is Comedy) is so held up to me, by the Poet, as I can therein
view the daily examples of men's lives, and images of Truth, in their manners,
so drawn for my delight, or profit, as I may (either way) use them: and will
I, rather (then make that true use) hunt out the Persons to defame, by my
malice of misapplying? and imperill the innocence, and candor of the Author, by
his calumny? It is an unjust way of hearing, and beholding Plays, this, and
most unbecomming a Gentleman to appear malignantly witty in another Work


They are no other but narrow, and shrunk natures; shriveld up, poor things,
that cannot think well of themselves, who dare to detract others. That
Signature is upon them, and it will last. A halfe-witted Barbarism! which no
Barbers art, or his bals, will ever expunge or take out


Why, Boy? This were a strange Empire, or rather a Tyranny, you would entitle
your Poet to, over Gentlemen, that they should come to hear, and see Plays,
and say nothing for their money


O, yes; say what you will: so it be to purpose, and in place.


Can any thing be out of purpose at a Play? I see no reason, if I come here,
and give my eighteen pence, or two shillings for my Seat, but I should take it
out in censure, on the Stage


Your two shilling worth is allowed you: but you will take your ten, shilling
worth, your twenty shilling worth, and more: And teach others (about you) to
do the like, that follow your leading face; as if you were to cry up or down
every Scene, by confederacy, be it right or wrong


Who should teach us the right, or wrong at a Play?


If your own science can not do it, or the love of Modesty, and Truth; all
other entreaties, or attempts -- are vain. You are fitter Spectators for the
Bears, then us, or the Puppets. This is a popular ignorance indeed, somewhat
better appareld in you, then the People: but a hard handed, and stiff
ignorance, worthy a Trewel, or a Hammer-man; and not only fit to be scorned,
but to be triumphed ore


By whom, Boy?


No particular, but the general neglect, and silence. Good Master Damplay, be
your self still, without a second: Few here are of your opinion to day, I
hope; to morrow, I am sure there will be none, when they have ruminated this


Let us mind what you come for, the ^lay, which will draw on to the Epitasis
now


Where Is Mr. Doctor?

O Mr. Tim Item,
His learned Pothecary! you are welcome:
He is within at dinner.

Dinner! Death!
That he will eat now, having such a business,
That so concerns him!

Why, can any business
Concern a man like his meat?

O twenty millions,
To a Physician, that is in practice: I
Do bring him news, from all the points of the Compass,
(That Is all the parts of the sublunary Globe.)
Of times, and double times.

In, in, sweet Item,
And furnish forth the Table with your news:
Deserve your dinner: Sow out your whole bag full:
The Guests will hear it.

I heard they were out.


But they are piec'd, and put together again,
You may go in, you will find them at high eating:
The Parson has an edifying stomach,
And a persuading Palate (like his name:)
He has begun three draughts of sack in Doctrines,
And four in Uses.

And they follow him.


No, Sir Diaphanous is a Recusant
In sack. He only takes it in French wine,
With an allay of water. In in, Item,
And leave your peeping.

I have a months mind,
To peep a little too. Sweet Mas' Needle,
How are they set?

At the boords end my Lady --.


And my young Mrs. by her?

Yes, the Parson
On the right hand (as he will not lose his place
For thrusting) and against him Mrs. Polish:
Next, Sir Diaphanous, against Sir Moath;
Knights, one again another: Then the Soldier,
The man of war, and man of peace the Lawyer:
Then the port Doctor, and the politic Bias,
And Mr. Compass circumscribeth all.

Nurse Keep, nurse Keep!

What noise is that within?




Mischief of men! what day, what hour is this?

Run for the cellar of strong waters, quickly.


Were you a mad man to do this at table?
And trouble all the Guests, to affright the Ladies,
And Gentlewomen?

Pox upo' your women,
And your half man there, Court-Sir Amber-gris:
A perfumed braggart: He must drink his wine
With three parts water; and have Amber in that too.

And you must therefore break his face with a Glass,
And wash his nose in wine.

Cannot he drink
In Orthodoxe, but he must have his Gums,
And Panym Drugs?

You should have used the Glass
Rather as balance, then the sword of Justice:
But you have cut his face with it, he bleeds.
Come you shall take your Sanctuary with me;
The whole house will be up in arms against you else,
Within this half hour; this way to my lodging.

A most rude action! carry her to her bed;
And use the Fricace to her, with those oils.
Keep your news Item now, and tend this business.

Good Gossip look to her.


How do you sweet charge?

She Is in a sweat.


I, and a faint sweat mary.


Let her alone to Tim: he has directions,
I Will hear your news Tim Item, when you have done.

Was ever such a Guest brought to my table?

These boistrous Soldiers have no better breeding.
Here Mr. Compass comes: where is your Captain,
Rudhudibr as de Ironside?

Gone out of doors.


Would he had nere come in them, I may wish.
He has discredited my house, and board,
With his rude swaggering manners, and endangered
My Neices health (by drawing of his weapon)
God knows how far; for Mr. Doctor does not.

The Doctor is an Ass then, if he say so,
And cannot with his conjuring names, Hippocrates;
Galen or Rasis, Avicen. Averroes,
Cure a poor wenches falling in a swoune:
Which a poor Farthing changed in Rosa solis,
Or Cynnamon water would.

How now? how does she?

She Is somewhat better. Mr. Item has brought her
A little about.

But there is Sir Moath your brother
Is fallen into a fit of the happyplexe,
It were a happy place for him, and us,
If he could steal to heaven thus: All the house
Are calling Mr. Doctor, Mr. Doctor.
The Parson he has gi'n him gone, this half hour;
He Is pale in the mouth already, for the fear
OF the fierce Captain.

Help me to my Chamber,
Nurse Keep: Would I could see the day no more,
But night hung over me, like some dark cloud;
That, buried with this loss of my good name,
I, and my house might perish, thus forgotten --

Her taking it to heart thus, more afflicts me
Then all these accidents, for they will blow over.

It was a barbarous Injury, I confess:
But if you will be counseled, Sir, by me,
The reverend Law lies open to repair
Your reputation. That will gi' you damages;
Five thousand pound for a finger, I have known
Given in Court: And let me pack your Jury.

There Is nothing vexes me, but that he has staind
My new white satin Doublet; and bespattered
My spick and span silk Stockings, of the day
They were drawn on: And here is a spot in my hose too.

Shrewd maimes! your Clothes are wounded desperately,
And that (I think) troubles a Courtier more,
An exact Courtier, then a gash in his flesh.

My flesh? I swear had he given me twice so much,
I never should have reckoned it. But my clothes
To be de defaced, and stigmatized so foulely!
I take it as a contumely done me
Above the wisdom of our Laws to right.

Why then you will challenge him?

I will advise,
Though Mr. Practice here does urge the Law;
And reputation it will make me of credit,
Beside great damages (let him pack my Jury.)

He speaks like Mr. Practice, one, that is
The Child of a Profession he is vowed too,
And servant to the study he has taken,
A pure Apprentice at Law! But you must have
The Counsel of the Sword; and square your action
Unto their Cannons, and that brotherhood,
If you do right.

I tell you Mr. Compass,
You speak not like a friend unto the Laws,
Nor scarce a subject, to persuade him thus,
Unto the breach of the peace: Sir you forget
There is a Court above, of the Star Chamber,
To punish Routs and Riots.

No, young Master,
Although your name be Practice there in Term time,
I do remember it. But you will not hear
What I was bound to say; but like a wild
Young haggard Justice, fly at breach of the Peace,
Before you know, whether the amorous Knight
Dares break the peace of conscience in a Duel.

Troth Mr. Compass, I take you my friend;
You shall appoint of me in any matter
That Is reasonable, so we may meet fair,
On even terms.

I shall persuade no other,
(And take your learned Counsel to advise you)
I Will run along with him. You say you will meet him,
On even terms. I do not see indeed
How that can be, 'twixt Ironside and you,
Now I consider it. He is my brother.
I do confess (we have called so twenty year:)
But you are, Sir, a Knight in Court, allied there,
And so befriended, you may easily answer
The worst success: He a known, noted, bold
Boy of the Sword, has all men's eyes upon him;
And there is no London-Iury, but are led
In evidence, as far by common fame,
As they are by present deposition.
Then you have many brethren, and near kinsmen.
If he kill you, it will be a lasting Quarrel
T'wixt them, and him. Whereas Rud: Ironside,
Although he have got his head into a Beaver,
With a huge feather, 's but a Corriers son,
And has not two old Cordov'an skins, to leave
In Leather Caps to mourn him in, if he die.
Again, you are generally beloved, he hated
So much, that all the hearts, and votes of men
Go with you, in the wishing all prosperity
Unto your purpose; he is a fat, corpulent,
Unweildy fellow: you, a dieted Spark,
Fit for the Combat. He has killed so many;
As it is ten to one his turn is next;
You never fought with any; less, slew any:
And therefore have the hopes before you.
I hope these things thus specified unto you,
Are fair advantages: you cannot encounter
Him upon equal terms. Beside, Sir Silkworme,
He has done you wrong in a most high degree:
And sense of such an Injury received,
Should so exacuate, and whet your choler,
As you should count your self an host of men,
Compared to him. And therefore you, brave Sir,
Have no more reason to provoke, or challenge
Him, then the huge great Porter has to try
His strength upon an Infant.

Mr. Compass,
You rather spur me on, then any way
Abate my courage to the Enterprise.

All Counsell's as it is taken. If you stand
On point of honor, not to have any odds,
I have rather then dissuaded you, then otherwise:
If upon terms of humor and revenge,
I have encouraged you. So that I think,
I have done the part of a friend on either side:
In furnishing your fear with matter first,
If you have any: Or, if you dare fight,
To heighten, and confirm your resolution.

I now do crave your pardon, Mr. Compass:
I did not apprehend your way before,
The true Perimiter of it: you have Circles,
And such fine draughts about!

Sir I do thank you,
I thank you Mr. Compass heartily;
I must confess, I never fought before,
And I Will be glad to do things orderly,
In the right place: I pray you instruct me.
Is It best I fight ambitiously, or maliciously?

Sir, if you never fought before, be wary,
Trust not your self too much.

Why? I assure you,
I Am very angry.

Do not suffer, though,
The flatuous, windy choler of your heart,
To move the clapper of your understanding,
Which is the guiding faculty, your reason:
You know not, if you will fight, or no, being brought
Vpo' the place.

O yes, I have imagined
Him treble armed, provoked too, and as furious
As Homer makes Achilles; and I find
My self not frighted with his same one jot.

Well, yet take heed. These fights imaginary,
Are less then skirmishes; the fight of shadows:
For shadows have their figure, motion
And their umbratile action from the real
Posture, and motion of the bodies act
Whereas (imaginarily) many times,
Those men may fight, dare scarce eye one another,
And much less meet. But if there be no help,
Faith I would wish you, send him a fair Challenge.

I will go pen it presently.

But word it
In the most generous terms.

Let me alone.

And silken phrase: the courtliest kind of Quarrel.

He Will make it a petition for his peace.

O, yes, of right, and he may do it by Lau.

Come, bring him out into the air a little:
There set him down. Bow him, yet bow him more,
Dash that same Glass of water in his face:
Now tweak him by the nose. Hard, harder yet:
If it but call the blood up from the heart,
I ask no more. See, what a fear can do!
Pinch him in the nape of the neck now; nip him, nip him.

He feels, there is life in him.

He graones, and stirs.

Tell him the Captaine's gone.

Ha!

He Is gone Sir.

Gi' him a box, hard, hard, on his left care.

O!

How do you feel your self?

Sore, sore.

But where?

I'my neck.

I nipt him there.

And in my head.

I box'd him twice, or thrice, to move those Sinews.

I swear you did.

What a brave man's a Doctor,
To beat one into health! I thought his blows
Would eene have killed him: he did feel no more
Then a great horse.

Is the wild Captain gone?
That man of murder?

All is calm and quiet.

Say you so, Cosen Bias? Then all is well.

How quickly a man is lost!

And soon recovered!

Where there are means, and Doctors, learned men,
And their Apothecaries, who are not now,
(As Chawcer says) their friendship to begin.
Well, could they teach each other how to win
I'their swath bands --.

Leave your Poetry good Gossip.
Your Chawcers clouts, and wash your dishes with 'hem,
We must rub up the roots of his disease,
And crave your peace a while, or else your absence.

Nay, I know when to hold my peace.

Then do it.
Gi' me your hand Sir Moath. Let Us feel your pulse.
It is a Pursinesse, a kind of Stoppage,
Or tumor of the Purse, for want of exercise,
That you are troubled with: some ligatures
In The neck of your Vesica, or Marsupium,
Are so close knit, that you cannot evaporate;
And therefore you must use relaxatives.
Beside, they say, you are so restive grown,
You cannot but with trouble put your hand
Into your pocket, to discharge a reckoning.
And this we sons of Physic do call chiragra
A kind of Crampe, or Hand-Gout. You shall purge for it.

Indeed your worship should do well to advise him,
To cleanse his body, all the three high ways;
That is, by Sweat, Purge, and Phlebatomy.

You say well learned Tim, I Will first prescribe him,
To give his purse a purge once, twice a week
At Dice, or Cards: And when the weather is open,
Sweat at a bowling Alley; or be let blood
IN the lending vein, and bleed a matter of fifty,
Or threescore ounces at a time. Then put
Your thumbs under your Girdle, and have some body
Else, pull out your purse for you, till with more ease,
And a good habit, you can do it your self.
And then be sure always to keep good diet;
And h'your table furnished from one end,
Unto the the other: It is good for the eyes,
But feed you on one dish still, have your Diet-drinke,
Ever in Bottles ready, which must come
From the King's Head: I will prescribe you nothing;
But what I Will take before you mine own self:
That is my course with all my Patients.

Very methodicall, Secundum Artem.

And very safe pro captu recipientis.

All errant learned men, how they 'spute Latin.

I had it of a Jew, and a great Rabbi,
Who every morning cast his cup of White Wind
With sugar, and by the residence in the bottom,
Would make report of any Chronick malady,
Such as Sir Moath's is, being an oppilation,
In that you call the neck of the money bladder,
Most anatomicall, and by dissection.

O Mr. Doctor, and his Pothecary
Good Mr. Item, and my Mistress Polish!
We need you all above! She Is fallen again,
In a worse fit then ever.

Who?

Your charge.

Come away Gentlemen.

This fit with the Doctor,
Has mended me past expectation.

O Sir Diaphanous, have you done?

I have brought it.

That Is well.

But who shall carry it now?

A friend:
I Will find a friend to carry it; Mr. Bias here
Will not deny me that.

What is it?

To carry
A Challenge I have writ unto the Captain.

Faith but I will Sir, you shall pardon me
For a twi-reason of State: I Will he^ren^ Challenges;
I will not hazard my Lords favor so;
Or forfeit mine own Judgment with his honor,
To turn a Russian: I have to commend me
Naught but his Lordships good opinion;
And to it my Kallygraphy, a fair hand,
Fit for a Secretary: Now you know, a man's hand
Being his executing part in fight,
Is more obnoxious to the common peril --

You shall not fight Sir, you shall only search
My Antagonist; commit us fairly there
Vpo' the ground on equal terms.

O Sir!
But if my Lord should hear I stood at end
Of any quarrel, 'twere an end of me
In a state course! I ha'read the Politiques;
And heard th'opinions of our best Divines.

The Gentleman has reason! Where was first
The birth of your acquaintance? or the Cradle
Of your strickt friend shipmade?

We met in France, Sir.

In France! that Garden of humanity,
The very seed-plot of all courtesies:
I wonder that your friendship sucked that aliment,
The milk of France; and see this sower effect
It does produce, against all the sweets of travel:
There, every Gentleman professing arms,
Thinks he is bound in honor to embrace
The bearing of a Challenge for another,
Without or questioning the cause, or asking
Least color of a reason. There Is no Cowardice,
No Poultrounerie, like urging why? wherefore?
But carry a Challenge, die, and do the thing.

Why, hear you Mr. Compass, I but crave
Your ear in private? I would carry his Challenge,
If I but hoped your Captain angry enough
To kill him: For (to tell you truth) this Knight,
Is an impertinent in Court, (we think him:)
And troubles my Lords Lodgings, and his Table
With frequent, and unnecessary visits,
Which we (the better sort of Servants) like not:
Being his Fellows in all other places,
But at our Masters board; and we disdain
To do those servile offices, often times,
His foolish pride, and Empire will exact,
Against the heart, or humor of a Gentleman.

Truth Mr. Bias, I Would not have you think
I speak to flatter you: but you are one
OF the deepest Politiques I ever met,
And the most subtily rational. I admire you.
But do not you conceive in such a case,
That you are accessory to his death,
From whom you carry a Challenge with such purpose.

Sir the corruption of one thing in nature,
Is held the Generation of another;
And therefore, I had as leive be accessory
Unto his death, as to his life.

A new
Moral Philosophy too! you will carry't then.

If I were sure, 't would not incense his choler
To beat the Messenger.

OF I Will secure you,
You shall deliver it in my lodging; safely,
And do your friend a service worthy thanks.

I Will venture it, upon so good Induction,
To rid the Court of an Impediment,
This baggage Knight.

Peace to you all Gentlemen,
Save to this Mushrome; who I hear is menacing
Me with a Challenge: which I come to anticipate,
And save the Law a labor: Will you fight Sir?

Yes, in my shirt.

O, that is to save your doublet;
I know it a Court trick! you had rather have
An Ulcer in your body, then a Pinke
More in your clothes.

Captain, you are a Coward,
If you not fight in your shirt.

Sir I not mean
To put it off for that, nor yet my doublet:
Yo' have cause to call me Coward, that more fear
The stroke of the common, and life giving air,
Then all your fury, and the Panoplie.

(Which is at best, but a thin linen armor.)
I think a cup of generous wine were better,
Then fighting in your shirts.

Sir, Sir, my valor,
It is a valor of another nature,
Then to be mended by a cup of wine.

I should be glad to hear of any valors,
Differing in kind; who have known hitherto,
Only one virtue, they call Fortitude,
Worthy the name of valor.

Which, who has not,
Is justly thought a Coward: And he is such.

O, you have read the Play there, the New Inn,
Of Ionsons, that decries all other valor
But what is for the public.

I do that too,
But did not learn it there; I think no valor
Lies for a private cause.

Sir, I Will redargue you,
By disputation.

O let us hear this!
I long to hear a man dispute in his shirt
Of valor, and his sword drawn in his hand.

His valor will take cold; put on your doublet.

His valor will keep cold, you are deceived;
And relish much the sweter in our ears:
It may be too, in the ordinance of nature.
Their valors are not yet so combatant,
Or truly antagonistick, as to fight;
But may admit to hear of some divisions,
Of Fortitude, may put 'hem off their Quarrel.

I would have no man think me so ungoverned,
Or subject to my passion, but I can
Read him a Lecture 'twixt my undertakings,
And executions: I do know all kinds
Of doing the business, which the Town calls valor.

Yes, he has read the Town, Towne-top's his Author!
Your first?

Is a rash headlong unexperience.

Which is in Children, Fools, or your street Gallants
OF the first head.

A pretty kind of valor!

Commend him, he will spin it out in's shirt,
Fine, as that thread.

The next, an indiscreet
Presumption, grounded upon often scapes.

Or the insufficiency of Adversaries,
And this is in your common fighting Brothers.
Your old Perdu's, who (after a time) do think,
The one, that they are shot free; the other, sword free.
Your third?

Is naught but an excess of choler,
That reigns in resty old men --.

Noble men's Porters,
And self conceited Poets.

And is rather
A peevishness, then any part of valor.

He but reherses, he concludes no valor.

A history of distempers, as they are practiced,
His Harangue undertaketh, and no more.
Your next?

Is a dull desperate resolving.

In case of some necessitous misery, or
Incumbent mischief.

Narrowness of mind,
Or ignorance being the root of it.

Which shou shall find in Gamesters, quite blown up.

Banckrupt Merchants, undiscovered Traitors.

Or your exemplified Malefactors,
That have survived their infamy, and punishment.

One that has lost his ears, by a just sentence
OF the Star Chamber, a right valiant Knave --
And is a Histrionicall Contempt,
Of what a man fears most; it being a mischief
In his own apprehension unavoidable.

Which is in Cowards wounded mortally,
Or Thieves adjudg'd to die.

This is a valor,
I should desire much to see encouraged:
As being a special entertainment
For our rogue People; and make often good sport
Unto 'hem, from the Gallows to the ground.

But mine is a Judicial resolving,
Or liberal undertaking of a danger --.

That might be avoided.

I, and with assurance,
That it is found in Noblemen, and Gentlemen,
Of the best sheafe.

Who having lives to lose,
Like private men, have yet a world of honor,
And public reputation to defend --.

Which in the brave historified Greeks,
And Romans you shall read of.

And (no doubt)
May in our Alder-men meet it, and their Deputies,
The Soldiers of the City, valiant blades,
Who (rather then their houses should be ransacked)
Would fight it out, like so many wild beasts;
Not for the fury they are commonly armed with:
But the close manner of their sight, and custom,
Of joining head to head, and foot to foot.

And which of these so well-prest resolutions
Am I to encounter now? For commonly,
Men that have so much choice before 'hem, have
Some trouble to resolve of any one.

There are three valors yet, which Sir Diaphanous,
Has (with his leave) not touched.

Yea? which are those?

He perks at that!

Nay, he does more, he chatters.

A Philosophical contempt of death,
Is one: Then an infused kind of valor,
Wrought in us by our Genii, or good spirits;
Of which the gallant Ethnicks had deep sense:
Who generally held, that no great Statesman,
Scholar, or Soldier, ere did any thing
Sine divino aliquo afflatu.

But there is a Christian valor, 'bove these too.

Which is a quiet patient toleration,
Of whatsoever the malicious world
With Injury does unto you; and consists
In passion, more then action, Sir Diaphanous.

Sure, I do take mine to be Christian valor --.

You may mistake though. Can you justify
On any cause, this seeking to deface,
The divine Image in a man?

O Sir!
Let 'hem alone: Is not Diaphanous
As much a divine Image, as is Ironside?
Let Images fight, if they will fight, a God's name.

Where Is Mr. Needle? Saw you Mr. Needle?
We are undone.

What ailes the frantic Nurse?

My Mistress is undone, she is crying out!
Where is this man trow? Mr. Needle?

Here.

Run for the party, Mrs. Chair the Midwife.
Nay, look how the man stands, as he were gok't!
She Is lost, if you not haste away the party.

Where is the Doctor?

Where a scoffing man is.
And his Apothecary, little better;
They laugh, and geere at all: will you dispatch?
And fetch the party quickly to our Mistress:
We are all undone! The Timpanie will out else.

News, news, good news, better then buttered news!
My Neice is found with Child, the Doctor tells me,


How?

The portion's paid!
The portion -- of the Captain! Is he here?

H'has spied your swords out! put 'hem up, put up,
Yo' have driven him hence; and yet your quarrell's ended.

In a most strange discovery.

Of light gold.

And cracked within the Ring. I take the Omen,
As a good Omen.

Then put up your Sword,
And on your Doublet. Give the Captain thanks.

I had been slur'd else. Thank you noble Captain!
Your quarrelling caused all this.

Where Is Compass?

Gone,
Shrunk hence,! contracted to his Center, I fear.

The slip is his then.

I had like to have been
Abused in the business, had the slip slur'd on me,
A Counterfeit.

Sir, we are all abused:
As many as were brought on to be Suitors;
And we will join in thanks, all to the Captain,
And to his fortune that so brought us off.

This was a pitiful poor shift of your Poet, Boy, to make his prime woman
with child, and fall in labor, just to compose a quarrel


With whose borrowed ears, have you heard, Sir, all this while, that you can
mistake the current of our Scene so? The stream of the Argument, threatened her
being with child from the very beginning, for it presented her in the first of
the second Act, with some apparent note of infirmity, or defect: from knowledge
of which, the Auditory were rightly to be suspended by the Author, till the
quarrel, which was but the accidental cause, hastened on the discovery of it,
in occasioning her affright; which made her fall into her throws presently,
and within that compass of time allowed to the Comedy, wherein the Poet
expressed his prime Artifice, rather then any error, that the detection of her
being with child, should determine the quarrel, which had produced it


The Boy is too hard for you. Brother Damplay, best mark the Play, and let him
alone


I care not for marking the Play: I Will damn it, talk, and do that I come for.
I will not have Gentlemen lose their privilege, nor I my self my prerogative,
for near an overgrowne, or superannuated Poet of 'hem all. He shall not give
me the Law; I will censure, and be witty, and take my Tobacco, and enjoy my
Magna Charta of reprehension, as my Predecessors have done before me


Even to license, and absurdity.


Not now, because the Gentlewoman is in travel: and the Midwife may come on
the sooner, to put her and us out of our pain


Well, look to your business afterward, Boy, that all things be clear, and
come properly forth, suited, and set together; for I will search what follows
severely and to the nail


Let your nail run smooth then, and not scratch: lest the Author be bold to
pare it to the quick, and make it smart: you will find him as severe as your self


A shrewd Boy! and has me every where. The Midwife is come, she has made
haste


Stay Mr. Needle, you do prick too fast
Vpo' the business: I must take some breath:
Lend me my stool, you have drawn a stitch upon me,
In faith, son Needle, with your haste.

Good Mother, piece up this breach; I Will gi' you a new Gown,
A new silke-Grogoran Gown. I Will do it Mother.

What'll you do? you have done too much already
With your prick-seame, and through-stitch. Mr. Needle,
I pray you sit not fabling here old tales,
Good Mother Chair, the Midwife, but come up.

How now Nurse, where is my Lady?

In her Chamber
Locked up, I think: she will speak with no body.

Knows she of this accident?

Alas Sir, no;
Would she might never know it.

I think her Ladyship
Too virtuous, and too nobly innocent,
To have a hand in so ill-form'd a business.

Your thought Sir is a brave thought, and a safe one,
The child now to be borne is not more free,
From the aspersion of all spot, then she?
She have her hand in plot, against Mr. Practice.
If there were nothing else, whom she so loves?
Cries up, and values? knows to be a man
Marked out, for a chief Justice in his cradle?
Or a Lord Paramount; the head of the Hall?
The Top or the Top-gallant of our Law?
Assure your self, she could not so deprave,
The rectitude of her Judgment, to wish you
Unto a wife, might prove your Infamy,
Whom she esteemed that part of the Commonwealth,
And had up for honor to her blood.

I must confess a great beholdingness
Unto her Ladyships offer, and good wishes.
But the truth is, I never had affection,
Or any liking to this Neice of hers.

You foresaw somewhat then?

I had my notes,
And my Prognostics.

You read Almanacks,
And study 'hem to some purpose, I believe?

I do confess, I do believe, and pray too:
According to the Planets at sometimes.

And do observe the sign in making Love?

As in Phlebotomy.

And choose your Mistress
By the good days, and leave her by the bad?

I do, and I do not.

A little more
Would fetch all his Astronomy from Allestree.

I tell you Mr. Compass, as my friend,
And under seal, I cast mine eye long since,
Vpo' the other wench, my Ladies woman,
Another manner of piece for handsomnesse,
Then is the Neice (but that is sub sigillo,
And as I give it you) in hope of your aid,
And counsel in the business.

You need counsel?
The only famous Counsel, of the kingdom,
And in all Courts? That is a Jeere in faith,
Worthy your name, and your profession too,
Sharp Mr. Practice.

No, upo' my Law,
As I am a Bencher, and now double Reader,
I meant in mere simplicity of request.

If you meant so. The Affairs are now perplexed,
And full of trouble, give 'hem breath, and settling,
I Will do my best. But in mean time do you
Prepare the Parson. (I am glad to know
This; for my self liked the young Maid before,
And loved her too.) Have you a License?

No;
But I can fetch one straight.

Do, do, and mind
The Parsons pint t'ingage him -- the business;
A knitting Cup there must be.

I shall do it.

It Is an affront, from you Sir; you here brought me,
Unto my Ladies, and to woo a wife,
Which since is proved a cracked commodity;
She has broke bulk too soon.

No fault of mine,
If she be cracked in pieces, or broke round;
It was my sisters fault, that ownes the house,
Where she has got her clap, makes all this noise.
I keep her portion safe, that is not scattered:
The money's rattle not; nor are they thrown,
To make a Musse, yet among the game some Suitors.

Can you endure that flout, close Mr. Bias,
And have been so bred in the Politiques?
The injury is done you, and by him only;
He lent you impressed money, and upbraids it:
Furnished you for the wooing, and now waves you.

That makes me to expostulate the wrong
So with him, and resent it as I do.

But do it home then,

Sir, my Lord shall know it.

And all the Lords of the Court too.

What a Moath
You are Sir Interest!

Wherein I entreat you,
Sweet Master Bias?

To draw in young Statesmen,
And heirs of policy into the noose
Of an infamous matrimony.

Yes,
Infamous, quasi in communem famam:
And Matrimony, quasi, matter of Money.

Learnedly urged, my cunning Mr. Bias.

With his lewd, known, and prostituted Neice.

My known, and prostitute: how you mistake,
And run upon a false ground, Mr. Bias!
(Your Lords will do me right.) Now, she is prostitute,
And that I know it (please you understand me.)
I mean to keep the portion in my hands:
And pay no moneys.

Mark you that Don Bias?
And you shall still remain in bonds to him,
For wooing furniture, and impressed charges.

Good Mr. Compass, for the sums he has had
Of me, I do acquit him: They are his own.
Here, before you, I do release him.

Good!

O Sir.

'Slid take it: I do witness it:
He cannot hurl away his money better.

He shall get so much Sir, by my acquaintance,
To be my friend: And now report to his Lords
As I deserve no otherwise.

But well:
And I will witness it, and to the value;
Four hundred is the price, if I mistake not,
Of your true friend in Court. Take hands, you have bought him,
And bought him cheap.

I am his worships servant.

And you his slave, Sir Moath. Sealed, and delivered.
Have you not studied the Court Complement?
Here are a pair of Humors, reconciled now,
That money held at distance: or their thoughts,
Baser then money.

Out thou catife witch!
Baud, Beggar, Gipsey: Any thing indeed,
But honest woman.

What you please, Dame Polish,
My Ladies Stroaker.

What is here to do?
The Gossips out!

Thou art a Traitor to me,
An Eve, the Apul, and the Serpent too:
A Viper, that have eat a passage through me,
Through mine own bowels, by thy retchlesnesse.

What frantic fit is this? I Will step aside
And hearken to it.

Did I trust thee, wretch,
With such a secret, of that consequence,
Did so concern me, and my child, our livelihood,
And reputation? And have thou undone us?
By thy connivence, nodding in a corner,
And suffering her begot with child so basely?
Sleepie unlucky Hag! Thou bird of night,
And all mischance to me.

Good Lady Empress!
Had I the keeping of your Daughters clicket
In charge? was that committed to my trust?

Her Daughter.

Softly Devil, not so lowed,
You Would have the house hear, and be witness, would you?

Let all the world be witness. Before I Will
Endure the Tyranny of such a tongue --
And such a pride --.

What will you do?

Tell truth,
And shame the She-man-Divell in puffed sleeves;
Run any hazard, by revealing all
Unto my Lady: how you changed the cradles,
And changed the children in 'hem.

Not so high!

Calling your Daughter Pleasance, there Placentia,
And my true Mistress by the name of Pleasance.

A horrid secret, this! worth the discovery;

And must you be thus loud?

I will be louder:
And cry it through the house, through every room,
And every office of the Lawndry-maids:
Till it be borne hot to my Ladies ears.
Ere I will live in such a slavery,
I Will do away my self.

Did thou not swear
To keep it secret? and upon what book?
(I do remember now) The Practice of Piety.

It was a practice of impiety,
Out of your wicked forge, I know it now,
My conscience tells me. First, against the Infants,
To rob them of their names, and their true parents;
TO abuse the neighborhood, keep them in error;
But most my Lady: She has the maine wrong:
And I will let her know it instantly.
Repentance, (if it be true) nere comes too late.

What have I done? Conjured a spirit up
I sha' not lay again? drawn on a danger,
And ruin on my self thus, by provoking
A peevish fool, whom nothing will pray of,
Or satisfy I fear? Her patience stirred,
Is turned to fury. I have run my Bark,
On a sweet Rock, by mine own arts, and trust:
And must get off again, or dash in pieces.

This was a business, worth the listening after.

O Mr. Compass, did you see my Mother?
Mistress Placentia, my Ladies Neice;
Is newly brought to bed of the bravest boy!
Will you go see it?

First, I Will know the father,
Ere I approach these hazards.

Mistress Midwife
Has promised to find out a father for it,
If there be need.

She may the safelier do it,
By virtue of her place. But pretty Pleasance,
I have a news for you, I think will please you.

What is it Mr. Compass?

Stay, you must
Deserve it ere you know it. Where Is my Lady?

Retired unto her Chamber, and shut up.

She hears of none of this yet? well, do you
Command the Coach; and fit your self to travel?
A little way with me.

Whither, for Gods sake.

Where I Will entreat you not to your loss, believe it.
If you dare trust your self.

With you the world ore.

The news will well requite the pains, I assure you.
And in this tumult you will not be mist.
Command the Coach, it is an instant business,
Wu' not be done without you. Parson Palate
Most opportunely met, step to my Chamber:
I Will come to you presently. There is a friend,
Or two, will entertain you, Mr. Practice.
Have you the License?

Here it is.

Let Us see it:
Your name's not in it.

I Will fill that presently;
It has the Seal, which is the maine: And restgistred,
The Clarke knows me, and trusts me.

Have you the Parson?

They say he is here, he' pointed to come hither.

I would not have him seen here for a world,
To breed supition. Do you intercept him,
And prevent that. But take your License with you,
And fill the blanke: or leave it here with me,
I Will do it for you, stay you with us at his Church,
Behind the old Exchange, we will come in the Coach,
And meet you there within this Quarter at least.

I am much bound unto you, Mr. Compass,
You have all the Law, and parts of Squire Practice
For ever at your use. I Will tell you news, too:
Sir, your Reversion's fallen: Thin-wits dead,
Surveyor of the Projects general.

When died he?

Een^ this morning, I received it
From a right hand.

Conceal it Mr. Practice,
And mind the maine affair, you are in hand with.

The Coach is ready Sir.

It Is well fair Pleasance,
Though now we shall not use it, bid the Coachman
Drive to the Parish Church, and stay about there,
Till Mr. Practice come to him, and employ him:
I have a License now, which must have entry
Before my Lawyers. Noble Parson Palate,
Thou shall be a mark advanced: here is a piece,
And do a feat for me.

What, Mr. Compass?

But run the words of Matrimony, over
My head, and Mrs. Pleasances in my Chamber:
There Is Captain Ironside to be a witness:
And here is a License to secure thee. Parson!
What do you stick at?

It is afternoon Sir,
Directly against the Canon of the Church;
You know it Mr. Compass: and beside,
I am engaged unto our worshipful friend,
The learned Mr. Practice in that business.

Come on, engage yourselfe: Who shall be able
To say you married us, but in the morning,
The most canonical minute of the day,
If you affirm it? That Is a spic'd excuse,
And shows you have set the Common Law, before
Any profession else, of love, or friendship.
Come Mrs. Pleasance, we cannot prevail
With the rigid Parson here; but Sir, I Will keep you
Locked in my lodging, 'till't be done elsewhere,
And under fear of Ironside.

Do you hear, Sir?

No, no, it matters not.

Can you think Sir
I would deny you my thing? not to loss
Of both my Livings: I will do it for you,
Have you a wedding Ring?

I and a Poesy:
Annulus hic nobis, quod scit uterque dabit.

Good!
This Ring will give you what you both desire.
I Will make the whole house chant it, and the Parish.

Why, well said Parson. Now to you my news,
That comprehend my reasons, Mrs. Pleasance.

Go, get a Nurse, procure her at what rate
You can: and out o'th'house with it, son Needle.
It is a bad Commodity.

Good Mother,
I know it, but the best would now be made on it.

And shall: you should not fret so, Mrs. Polish,
Nor you Dame Keep; my Daughter shall do well,
When she has taken my Cawdle. I have known
Twenty such breaches piec'd up, and made whole,
Without a bum of noise. You two fall out?
And tear up one another?

Blessed woman?
Blessed be the Peacemaker.

The Pease-dresser!
I Will hear no peace from her. I have been wronged,
So has my Lady, my good Ladies worship,
And I will right her, hoping she will right me.

Good gentle Keep, I pray thee Mistress Nurse,
Pardon my passion, I was misadvis'd,
Be thou yet better, by this grave sage woman,
Who is the Mother of Matrons, and great persons,
And knows the world.

I do confess, she knows
Something -- and I know something --.

Put your somethings.
Together then.

I, here is a chance fallen out
You cannot help; less can this Gentlewoman;
I can and will, for both. First, I have sent
By-chop away; the cause gone, the fame cease.
Then by my Cawdle, and my Cullice, I set
My Daughter on her feet, about the house here:
She Is young, and must stir somewhat for necessity,
Her youth will bear it out. She shall pretend,
To Have had a fit of the Mother: there is all.
If you have but a Secretary Landresse,
To blanch the Linen -- Take the former counsels
Into you; keep them safe in your own breasts;
And make your Merkat of 'hem at the highest.
Will you go peach, and cry yourselfe a fool
At Granam's Cross? be laughed at, and dispis'd*
Betray a purpose, which the Deputy
Of a double Ward, or scarce his Alderman,
With twelve of the wisest Questmen could find out,
Employed by the Authority of the City?
Come, come, be friends: and keep these women-matters,
Smock-secrets to our selves, in our own verge.
We shall mar all, if once we open the mysteries
OF the Tyring-house, and tell what is done within:
No Theaters are more cheated with apparances,
Or these shop-lights, then the Ages, and folk in them,
That seem most curious.

Breath of an Oracle!
You shall be my dear Mother; wisest woman
That ever tip'd her tongue, with point of reasons,
To turn her hearers! Mistress Keep, relent,
I did abuse thee; I confess to penance:
And on my knees ask thee forgiveness.

Rise,
She does begin to melt, I see it --.

Nothing
Grieved me so much, as when you called me Baud:
Witch did not trouble me, nor Gypsy; no
Nor Beggar. But a Baud, was such a name!

No more rehearsals; Repetitions
Make things the worse: The more we stir (you know
The Proverb, and it signifies a) stink.
What Is done, and dead, let it be buried.
New hours will fit fresh handles, to new thoughts.

Run to the Church, Sirrah. Get all the Drunkards
To ring the Bells, and jangle them for joy
My Neice has brought an Heir unto the house,
A lusty boy. Where Is my sister Loadstone?
A sleep at afternoones! It is not wholesome;
Against all rules of Physic, Lady sister.
The little Doctor will not like it. Our Neice
Is new delivered of a chopping Child,
Can call the Father by the name already,
If it but open the mouth round. Mr. Compass,
He is the man, they say, fame gives it out,
Has done that Act of honor to our house,
And friendship to pomp out a Son, and Heir,
That shall inherit nothing, surely nothing
From me at least. I come to invite your Ladyship
To be a witness; I will be your Partner,
And give it a horne-spoone, and a treene dish;
Bastard, and Beggars badges, with a blanket
For Dame the Doxey to march round the Circuit,
With bag, and baggage.

Thou malicious Knight,
Envious Sir Moath, that eats on that which feeds thee,
And frets her goodness, that sustaines thy being;
What company of Mankind would own thy brotherhood,
But as thou have a title to her blood,
Whom thy ill nature has chose out t'insult on,
And vex thus, for an Accident in her house,
As if it were her crime! Good innocent Lady,
Thou show thy self a true corroding Vermin,
Such as thou art.

Why, gentle Mr. Compass?
Because I wish you joy of your young Son,
And Heir to the house, you have sent us?

I have sent you?
I know not what I shall do. Come in friends:
Madam, I pray you be pleased to trust your self
Unto our company.

I did that too late;
Which brought on this calamity upon me,
With all the infamy I hear; your Soldier,
That swaggering Guest.

Who is returned here to you,
Your vowed friend, and servant; comes to sup with you,
So we do all; and 'll prove he has deserved,
That special respect, and favor from you,
As not your fortunes, with your self to boot,
Cast on a Feather-bed, and spread of the sheets
Under a brace of your best Persian Carpets,
Were scarce a price to thank his happy merit.

What impudence is this? can you endure
To hear it sister?

Yes, and you shall hear it;
Who will endure it worse. What deserves he
In your opinion, Madam, or weighed Judgment,
That, things thus hanging (as they do in doubt)
Suspended, and suspected, all involved,
And wrapped in error, can resolve the knot?
Redintigrate the fame, first of your house?
Restore your Ladyships quiet? render then
Your Neice a Virgin, and unvitiated?
And make all plain, and perfect (as it was)
A practice to betray you, and your name?

He speaks impossibilities.

Here he stands,
Whose fortune has done this, and you must thank him:
To what you call his swaggering, we owe all this.
And that it may have credit with you Madam,
Here is your Neice, whom I have married, witness
These Gentlemen, the Knight, Captain, and Parson,
And this grave Politic Tell-troth of the Court.

What Is she that I call Neice then?

Polishes Daugh
Her Mother Good wy' Polish has confessed it
To Granam Keep, the Nurse, how they did change
The children in their Cradles.

To what purpose?

To get the portion, or some part of it,
Which you must now disburse entire to me, Sir,
If I but gain her Ladyships consent.

I bid God give you joy, if this be true.

As true it is, Lady, Lady, in the song.
The portion's mine, with interest Sir Mouth;
I will not 'bate you a single Harrington,
Of interest upon interest. In mean time,
I do commit you to the Guard of Ironside.
My brother here, Captain Rudhudibras:
From whom I will expect you, or your Ransom.

Sir you must prove it, and the possibility,
Ere I believe it.

For the possibility,
I leave to trial. Truth shall speak it self.
O Mr. Practice, did you meet the Coach?

Yes Sir, but empty.

Why, I sent it for you.
The business is dispatched here, ere you come;
Come in, I Will tell you how: you are a man
Will look for satisfaction, and must have it.

So do we all, and long to hear the right.

Troth, I am one of those that labor with the same longing, for it is almost
pucker'd, and pulled into that knot, by your Poet, which I cannot easily, with
all the strength of my imagination, untie


Like enough, nor is it in your office to be troubled or perplexed with it, but
to sit still, and expect. The more your imagination busies it self, the more
it is entangled, especially if (as I told, in the beginning) you happen on the
wrong end


He has said sufficient, Brother Damplay; our parts that are the Spectators,
or should hear a Comedy, are to await the process, and events of things, as
the Poet presents them, not as we would corruptly fashion them. We come here
to behold Plays, and censure them, as they are made, and fitted for us; not to
beslave our own thoughts, with censorious spitle tempering the Poets clay, as
we were to mould every Scene anew: That were a mere Plastic, or Potters
ambition, most unbecomming the name of a Gentleman. No, let us mark, and not
lose the business on foot, by talking. Follow the right thread, or find it


Why, here his Play might have ended, if he would have let it; and have spared
us the vexation of a fifth Act yet to come, which every one here knows the
issue of already, or may in part conjecture


That conjecture is a kind of Figure-flinging, or throwing the Dice, for a
meaning was never in the Poets purpose perhaps. Stay, and see his last Act, his
Catastrophe, how he will perplexe that, or spring some fresh cheat, to
entertain the Spectators, with a convenient delight, till some unexpected, and
new encounter break out to rectify all, and make good the Conclusion


Which, ending here, would have shown dull, flat, and unpointed; without any
shape, or sharpness, Brother Damplay


Well, let us expect then: And wit be with us, of the Poets part.

TRoth Mr. Item, here is a house divided,
And quartered into parts, by your Doctors ingine.
H'has cast out such aspersions on my Ladies
Neice here, of having had a Child; as hardly
Will be wiped off, I doubt.

Why, is it not true?

True! did you think it?

Was she not in labor?
The Midwife sent for?

There Is your error now!
Yo' have drunk of the same water.

I believed it,
And gave it out too.

More you wronged the party;
She had no such thing about her, innocent creature!

What had she then? only a fit of the Mother,
They burnt old shoes, Goose-feathers, Assafoetida,
A few horn shavings, with a bone, or two,
And she is well again, about the house; --

Is It possible?

See it, and then report it.

Our Doctors Vrinall-Judgement is halfe-crack'd then.

Cracked in the case, most hugely, with my Lady,
And sad Sir Moath, her brother; who is now
Under a cloud a little.

Of what? Disgrace?

He is committed to Rud-hudibras,
The Captain Ironside, upon displeasure,
From Mr. Compass, but it will blow off.

The Doctor shall reverse his, instantly,
And set all right again: if you will assist
But in a toy; Squire Needle, comes in my nodle now.

Good, Needle and Nodle! what may't be? I long for it.

Why, but to go to bed: feign a distemper
Of walking in your sleep, or talking in it
A little idly, but so much, as on' it,
The Doctor may have ground, to raise a cure
For's reputation.

Any thing, to serve
The worship of the man I love and honor.

O! gi' you joy Mademoiselle Compass!
You are his Whirle-poole now: all to be married,
Against your Mothers leave, and without counsel!
H' has fished fair, and caught a Frog, I fear it.
What fortune have you to bring him in dower?
You can tell stories now: you know a world
Of secrets to discover.

I know nothing
But what is told me; nor can I discover
Anything.

No, you shall not, I Will take order.
Go, get you in there: It is Ember-weeke!
I Will keep you fasting from his flesh a while.

See, who is here? she 'has been with my Lady; who kissed her, all to kissed her,
twice or thrice

And called her Neice again, and viewed her Linen.

You have done a Miracle, Mother Chair.

Not I,
My Cawdle has done it. Thank my Cawdle heartily.

It shall be thanked, and you too, wisest Mother;
You shall have a new, brave, foure-pound Beaver hat,
Set with enameled studs, as mine is here:
And a right pair of Cristall Spectacles,
Cristall of the Rock, thou mighty Mother of Dames,
Hung in an Ivory Case, at a gold Belt,
And silver Bells to gingle, as you pase
Before your fifty Daughters in procession
To Church, or from the Church.

Thanks Mrs. Polish.

She does deserve as many pensions,
As there be pieces in a -- Maidenhead;
Were I a Prince to give 'hem.

Come sweet Charge,
You shall present your self about the house, be confident, and bear up;
you shall be seen.

What? I can make you amends, my learned Counsel,
And satisfy a greater Injury
To chafed Mr. Practice. Who would think
That you could be thus testie?

A grave head!
Gi'n over to the study of our Laws.

And the prime honors of the Commonwealth.

And you to mind a wise.

What should you do
With such a toy as a wife, that might distract you,
Or hinder you in your Course?

He shall not think on it.

I will make over to you my Possession,
Of that same place is fallen (you know) to satisfy
Surveyor of the Projects general.

And that is an office, you know how to stir in.

And make your profits of.

Which are (indeed)
The ends of a gown'd man: Show your activity,
And how you are built for business.

I accept it
As a P^ssession, be it but a Reversion.

You first told me 'twas a Possession.

I,
I told you that I heard so.

All is one,
He Will make Reversion a Possession quickly.

But I must have a general Release from you.

Do one, He do the other.

It Is a match
Before my brother Ironside.

It Is done.

We two are reconciled then.

To a Lawyer,
That can make use of a place, any half title,
Is better then a wife.

And will save charges
Of Coaches, Vellute Gowns, and cut-worke Smocks.

He is to occupy an office wholly.

True, I must talk with you nearer, Mr. Practice,
About recovery of my wives portion,
What way I were best to take.

The plainest way.

What Is that, for plainness?

Sue him at Common Law:
Arrest him on an Action of Choke-baile,
Five hundred thousand pound; it will affright him,
And all his sureties. You can prove your marriage?

Yes.
We Will talk of it within, and hear my Lady.

I Am sure, the Rogue of the house went all that way;
She was with Child, and Mr. Compass got it.

Why, that you see, is manifestly false,
H' has married the other; our true Neice he says:
He would not woo 'hem both: he is not such
A Stallion, to leap all. Again, no Child
Appears, that I can find with all my search,
And strictest way of Inquiry, I have made
Through all my family. A fit of the Mother,
The women say she had, which the Midwife our'd,
With burning bones and feathers: Here Is the Doctor.

O noble Doctor, did not you, and your Item,
Tell me our Neice was in labor?

If I did,
What follows?

And that Mother Midnight
Was sent for?

So she was; and is in the house still.

But here has a noise been since, she was delivered
Of a brave boy, and Mr. Compasse's getting.

I know no rattle of Gossips, nor their noyses.
I hope you take not me for a Pimpe errant,
To deal in smock Affairs? Where Is the Patient?
The infirm man, I was sent for, Squire Needle?

Is Needle sick?

My 'Pothecary tells me
He is in danger; how is it Tim? where is he?

I cannot hold him down. He Is up, and walks,
And talks in his perfect sleep, with his eyes shut,
As sensibly, as he were broad awake.

See, here becomes, He Is fast asleep, observe him.

He Will tell us wonders: What do these women here?

Hunting a man half naked? you are fine beagles!
You Would have his dousets.
I have linen breeks on.

He hears, but he sees nothing.

Yes, I see
Who hides the treasure yonder.

Ha? what treasure?

If you ask questions, he 'wakes presently:
And then you will hear no more, till his next fit.

And whom she hides it for.

Do you mark Sir? Int.

A fine she spirit it is, an Indian Mag-pie.
She was an Aldermans Widow, and fell in love
With our Sir Moath, my Ladies brother.

(Hear you?)

And she has hid an Aldermans estate;
Dropped through her bill in little holes, in the Garden,
And scrapes earth over 'hem; where none can spy
But I, who see all by the Glowormes light,
That creeps before.

I knew the Gentlewoman;
Alderman Parrots Widow, a fine Speaker,
As any was in the Clothing, or the Bevy;
She did become her scarlet, and black Velvet,
Her green, and purple --

Save thy colors, Rainebow,
Or she will run thee over, and all thy lights.

She dwelt in Doo-little Lane, a top of the hill there;
IN the round Cage, was after Sir Chime Squirrell's.
She would eat naught but Almonds, I assure you.

Would thou had a dose of pills, a double dose,
OF the best purge, to make thee turn tale, the other way.

You are a foul mouthed, purging, absurd Doctor;
I tell you true, and I did long to tell it you.
You ha'spread a scandal in my Ladies house here,
On her sweet Neice, you never can take off
With all your purges, or your plaster of Oaths;
Though you distill your Dam-me, drop by drop,
IN your defense. That she has had a Child,
Here she does spit upon thee, and defy thee;
Or I do it for her.

Madam, pray you bind her
To her behavior. Tie your Gossip up,
Or send her unto Bet'lem.

Go thou thither,
That better have deserved it, shame of Doctors:
Where could she be delivered? by what charm?
Restored to her strength so soon? who is the Father?
Or where the Infant? Ask your Oracle,
That walks, and talks in his sleep.

Where is he? gone?
You have lost a fortune listening to her, to her Tabour.
Good Madam lock her up.

You must give loosers
Their leave to speak, good Doctor.

Follow his footing
Before he get to his bed: This rest is lost else.

Where is my wife? what have you done with my wife,
Gossip of the Counsels?

I, sweet Mr. Compass?
I honor you, and your wife.

Well, do so still.
I will not call you Mother though, but Polish.
Good Gossip Polish, where have you hid my wife?

I hide your wife?

Or she is run away.

That would make all suspected, Sir, a fresh.
Come we will find her, if she be in the house.

Why should I hide your wife, good Mr. Compass?

I know no cause, but that you are goo'dy Polish,
That Is good at malice; good at mischief; all
That can perplexe, or trouble a business, thoroughly.

You may say what you will: yo' are Mr. Compass,
And carry a large sweep, Sir, in your Circle.

I Will sweep all corners, Gossip, to spring this.
If It be above ground, I will have her cried,
By the Common-cryer, through all the Ward,
But I will find her.

It will be an Act
Worthy your justice, Madam.

And become
The integrity, and worship of her name.

It Is such a Fly, this Gossip, with her buz,
She blows on every thing, in every place!

A busy woman, is a fearful grievance!
Will he not sleep again?

Yet instantly,
As soon as he is warm. It is the nature
Of the disease, and all these cold dry fumes,
That are melancholicke, to work at first,
Slow, and insensibly in their ascent,
Till being got up, and then distilling down
Vpo' the brain; they have a pricking quality
That breeds this restless rest, which we, the sons
Of Physic, call a walking in the sleep,
And telling mysteries, that must be heard.
Softly, with art, as we were sowing pillowes
Under the Patients elbowes, else they would fly
Into a frenzy, run into the Woods,
Where there are Noises, huntings, shoutings, hallowings,
Amidst the brakes, and furzes, over bridges
Fall into waters: Scratch their flesh: Sometimes
Drop down a praecipice, and there be lost.
How now! what does her?

He is up again,
And 'gins to talk.

OF the former matter, Item?

The treasure, and the Lady: That Is his argument.

O me, happy man! he cannot off it.
I shall know all then.

With what appetite
Our own desires delude us! Hear you Tim?
Let no man interrupt us.

Sir Diaphanous,
And Mr. Bias, his Court-friend's, desire
To kiss his Neices hands, and gratulate
The firm recovery of her good fame,
And honor --

Good, say to 'hem, Mr. Item,
My Neice is on my Ladies side: they will find her there.
I pray to be but spared, for half an hour:
I Will see 'hem presently.

Do, put 'hem off, Tim.
And tell 'hem the importance of the business.
Here, he is come! sooth; and have all out of him.

How do you Lady-bird? so hard at work, still?
What Is that you say? Do you bid me walk, sweet Bird?
And tell our Knight? I will. How? walk knave, walk?
I think y' are angry with me

Fine Pol!
Pol's a fine bird! O fine Lady Pol!
Almond for Parrat; Parrat's a brave bird:
Three hundred thousand pieces have you stuck,
Edge-long into the ground, within the Garden?
O'bounteous Bird!

And me, most happy creature.

Smother your joy.

How? and dropped twice so many --

Ha! where?

Contain your self.

IN the old Well?

I cannot, I am a man of flesh, and blood:
Who can contain himself, to hear the Ghost
Of a dead Lady, do such works as these?
And a City Lady too, of the straight waste?

He Is gone.

I will go try the truth of it.

Follow him,

See what he does; if he bring you
A'ssay of it now.

I Will say he is a rare fellow:
And has a rare disease.

And I will work
As rare a cure upon him.

How, good Doctor?

When he has uttered all, that you would know of him;
I Will cleanse him with a pill (as small as a pease)
And stop his mouth: for there his issue lies,
Between the Muscles of the tongue.

He Is come.

What did he, Item?

The first step he stepped
Into the Garden, he pulled these five pieces
Up, in a fingers breath one of another.
The dirt sticks on 'hem still.

I know enough.
Doctor, proceed with your Cure, I Will make thee famous,
Famous among the sons of the Physicians,
Machaon, Podalirius, Esculapius.
Thou shall have a golden beard, as well as he had;
And thy Tim Item here, have one of silver:
A livery beard. And all thy 'Pothecaries
Belong to thee. Where Is Squire Needle? gone?

He Is pricked away, now he has done the work.

Prepare his pill, and gi' it him before Supper.

I Will send for a dozen o'labourers to morrow,
To turn the surface of the Garden up.

In mould? bruise every clod?

And have all sifted;
For I Will not loose a piece of the Birds bounty,
And take an Inventory of all.

And then,
I would go down into the Well --

My self;
No trusting other hands: Six hundred thousand,
To the first three; nine hundred thousand pound --

'Twill purchase the whole Bench of Aldermanity,
Stripped to their shirts.

There never did accrue,
So great a gift to man, and from a Lady,
I never saw but once; now I remember,
We met at Merchants* Taylors-hall, at dinner,
In Thred-needle street,

Which was a sign Squire Needle
Should have the thredding of this thread.

It Is true;
I shall love Parrots better, while I know him.

Il'd have her statue cut, now in white marble.

And have it painted in most orient colors.

That Is right! all City statues must be painted:
Else, they be worth naught in their subtle Judgments.

My truest friend in Court, dear Mr. Bias;
You hear of the recovery of our Neice
In fame, and credit?

Yes, I have been with her,
And gratulated to her; but I am sorry
To find the Author of the foul aspersion
Here in your company, this insolent Doctor.

You do mistake him: He is clear got off on it.
A Gossips Jealousy first gave the hint.
He drives another way, now, as I would have him.
He Is a rare man, the Doctor, in his way.
H' has done the noblest cure here, in the house,
On a poor Squire, my sisters Tailor, Needle
That talked in's sleep; would walk to Saint John's wood,
And Waltham Forest, escape by all the ponds,
And pits in the way; run over two-inch bridges;
With his eyes fast, and in the dead of night!
I Will have you better acquainted with him. Doctor,
Here is my dear, dear, dearest friend in Court,
Wise, powerful Mr. Bias; pray you salute
Each other, not as strangers, but true friends.

This is the Gentleman you brought to day,
A Suitor to your Neice?

Yes.

You were
Agreed, I heard; the writings drawn between you?

And sealed.

What broke you off?

This rumor of her?
Was it not Mr. Bias?

Which I find
Now false, and therefore come to make amends
IN the first place. I stand to the old conditions.

Faith give 'hem him, Sir Moath, what ere they were.
You have a brave occasion now, to cross
The flanting Mr. Compass, who pretends
Right to the portion, by the other Intaile.

And claims it. You do hear he is married?

We hear his wife is run away from him,
Within: She is not to be found in the house,
With all the Hue, and Cry is made for her,
Through every room; the Larders have been searched,
The Bak-houses, and Boulting-tub, the Ovens,
Wash-house, and Brew House, nay the very Furnace,
And yet she is not heard of.

Be she nere heard of,
The safety of Great Britain lies not on it.
You are concent with the ten thousand pound,
Defalking the four hundred garnish money?
That Is the condition here, before the Doctor,
And your demand, friend Bias.

It is Sir Moath.

Here comes the Parson then, shall make all sure.

Go you with my friend Bias, Parson Palate,
Unto my Neice; assure them we are agreed.

And Mrs. Compass too, is found within.

Where was she hid?

In an old Botle-house,
Where they scraped trenchers; there her mother had thrust her.

You shall have time, Sir, to triumph on him,
When this fine feate is done, and his Rud-Ironside.

Was ever any Gentlewoman used
So barbarously by a malicious Gossip,
Pretending to be Mother to her too?

Pretending! Sir, I am her Mother, and challenge
A right, and power for what I have done.

Out, Hag.
Thou that have put all nature off, and woman:
For sordid gain, betrayed the trust committed
Unto thee by the dead, as from the living:
Changed the poor innocent Infants in their Cradles:
Defrauded them of their parents, changed their names,
Calling Placentia, Pleasance; Pleasance, Placentia.

How knows he this?

Abused the neighbour-hond,
But most this Lady. Did enforce an oath,
To this poor woman, on a pious book,
To keep close thy impiety.

Have you told this?

I told it? no, he knows it, and much more,
As he is a cunning man.

A cunning fool,
If that be all.

But now to your true daughter,
That had the Child, and is the proper Pleasance,
We must have an account of that too, Gossip;

This's like all the rest of Mr. Compass.

Help, help for Charity; Sir Moath Interest
Is fallen into the Well.

Where? where?

IN the Garden.
A rope to save his life.

How came be there?

He thought to take possession of a fortune,
There newly dropped him, and the old Chain broke,
And down fell he in the Bucket.

Is it deep?

We cannot tell. A rope: help with a rope.

He is got out again. The Knight is saved.

A little sows'd in the water: Needle saved him.

The water saved him, 'twas a fair escape.

Have you no hurt?

A little wet.

That Is nothing.

I wished you stay Sir till to morrow: And told you,
It was no lucky hour: since six a Clock
All stars were retrograde.

IN the name
Of fate, or folly how came you in the Bucket?

That is a Quere of another time, sister,
The Doctor will resolve you -- who has done
The admirable'st cure upon your Needle!
Gi' me thy hand good Needle: thou came timely.
Take off my hood and coat. And let me shake
My self a little. I have a world of business.
Where is my Nephew Bias? and his wife?
Who bids God gi'hem joy? Here they both stand
As sure affianced, as the Parson, or words
Can tie 'hem.

We all wish 'hem joy, and happiness.

I saw the Contract, and can witness it.

He shall receive ten thousand pounds to morrow.
You looked for it, Compass, or a greater sum,
But it is disposed of, this, another way.
I have but one Neice, verily Compass.

I Will find another. Varlet, do your office.

I do arrest your body, Sir Moath Interest,
In the Kings name: At suite of Mr. Compass,
And Dame Placentia his wife. The Action sentred,
Five hundred thousand pound.

Hear you this, sister?
And has your house the ears, to hear it too?
And to resound the affront?

I cannot stop
The Laws, or hinder Justice. I can be
Your Bail, if it may betaken,

With the Captains,
I ask no better.

Here are better men,
Will give their Bail.

But yours will not be taken,
Worshipful Doctor; you are good security
For a suit of clothes, to the Tailor, that dares trust you:
But not for such a sum, as is this Action.
Varlet, You know my mind.

You must to prison, Sir,
Unless you can find Bail the Creditor likes.

I would feign find it, if you would show me where.

It is a terrible Action; more indeed,
Then many a man is worth. And is called Fright-Baile.

Faith I will bail him, at mine own apperill.
Varlet, be gone: I Will once ha'the reputation,
To be security for such a sum.
Bear up Sir Moath.

He is not worth the Buckles
About his Belt, and yet this Ironside clashes.

Peace, lest he hear you Doctor; we will make use of him.
What does your brother Compass, Captain Ironside,
Demand of us, by way of challenge, thus?

Your Neices portion; in the right of his wife.

I have assured one portion, to one Neice,
And have no more t'account for, that I know of:
What I may do in charity -- if my sister,
Will bid an Offering for her maid, and him,
As a Benevolence to 'hem, after Supper,
I Will spit into the Basin, and entreat
My friends to do the like.

Spit out thy gall,
And heart, thou Viper: I will now no mercy,
No pity of thee, thy false Neice, and Needle;
Bring forth your Child, or I appeal you of murder,
You, and this Gossip here, and Mother Chair.



No, Mrs. Midwife.
I saw the Child, and you did give it me,
And put it in my arms, by this ill token,
You wished me such another; and it cried.

The Law is plain; if it were heard to cry,
And you produce it not, he may indict
All that conceal 't, of Felony, and Murder.

And I will take the boldness, Sir, to do it:
Beginning with Sir Moath here, and his Doctor.

Good faith this same is like to turn a business.

And a shrewd business, marry: they all start at't.

I have the right thread now, and I will keep it.
You good'y Keep, confess the truth to my Lady,
The truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth.

I scorn to be prevented of my glories.
I plotted the deceit, and I will own it.
Love to my Child, and lucre of the portion
Provoked me; wherein though the event has failed
In part, I will make use of the best side.
This is my Daughter, and she has had a Child
This day, unto her shame, I now profess it.)
By this mere false-stick Squire Needle, but
Since this wise Knight, has thought it good to change
The foolish Father of it, by assuring
Her to his dear friend, Mr. Bias; and him
Again to her, by clapping of him on
With his free promise of ten thousand pound,
Before so many witnesses.

Whereof I
Am one.

And I another.

I should be unnatural
To my own flesh, and blood, would I not thank him.
I thank you Sir: and I have reason for it.
For here your true Neice stands, fine Mrs. Compass.
(I Will tell you truth, you have deserved it from me.)
To whom you are by bond engaged to pay
The sixteen thousand pound, which is her portion,
Due to her husband, on her marriage-day.
I speak the truth, and nothing but the truth.

You Will pay it now, Sir Moath, with interest?
You see the truth breaks out on every side of you.

Into what nets of cous'nage am I cast
On every side? each thread is grown a noofe:
A very mesh: I have run my self into
A double break, of paying twice the money.

You shall be released of paying me a penny,
With these conditions.

Will you leave her then?

Yes, and the sum, twice told, ere take a wife,
To pick out Mounsieur Needles basting threads.

Gossip you are paid: though he be a fit nature,
Worthy to have a Whore justly put on him;
He is not bad enough to take your Daughter,
On such a cheat. Will you yet pay the portion?

What will you 'bate?

No penny the Law gives.

Yes, Bias's money.

What? your friend in Court?
I will not rob you of him, nor the purchase,
Nor your dear Doctor here, stand altogether.
Birds of a nature all, and of a feather.

Well, we are all now reconciled to truth.
There rests yet a Gratuitie from me,
To be conferred upon this Gentleman;
Who (as my Nephew Compass says) was cause,
First of the offense, but since of all the amends,
The Quarrel caused the affright; that fright brought on
The travel, which made peace; the peace drew on
This new discovery, which ends all
In reconcilement.

When the portion
Is tendered, and received.

Well, you must have it,
As good at first as last. It Is well said brother.
And I, if this good Captain will accept me,
Give him my self, endow him with my estate,
And make him Lord of me, and all my fortunes:
He that has saved my hour, though by chance,
I Will really study his, and how to thank him.

And ^ embrace you, Lady, and your goodness,
And vow to quit all thought of war hereafter;
Save what is fought under your colors, Madam.

More work then for the Parson; I shall cap
The Loadstone with an Ironside, I see.

And take in these, the forlorn Couple, with us,
Needle, and's Thread, whose portion I will think on;
As being a business, waiting on my bounty:
Thus I do take possession of you, Madam,
My true Magnetic Mistress, and my Lady.

WEll, Gentlemen, I now must under seal,
And the Authors charge, waive you, and make my 'appeale
To the supremest power, my LORD, the KING;
Who best can judge of what we humbly bring.
He knows our weakness, and the Poets faults;
Where he does stand upright, go firm, or halts;
And he will doom him. To which voice he stands,
And prefers that, before all the Peoples hands.

