THE SAD SHEPHERD OR, A TALE OF ROBIN-HOOD.

WRITTEN By BEN: JOHNSON.

Nec erubuit sylvas habitare Thaleia.

LONDON, Printed M.DC.XLI.

The SCENE is Sher-wood.

Consisting of a Landt-shape of Forest, Hills, Valleys, Cottages, A Castle, A
River, Pastures, Herds, Flocks, all full of Country simplicity. Robin-hoods
Bower, his Well, The Witches Dimble, The Swine'ards Oak, The Hermits Cell

RObin-hood, having invited all the Shep'erds and Shep'erdesses of the Vale of
Be'voir, to a Feast in the Forest of Sherwood, and trusting to his Mistress,
Maid Marian, with her Wood-men, to kill him Venison against the day: Having
left the like charge with Friar Tuck his Chaplain, and Steward, to command the
rest of his merry men, to see the Bower made ready, and all things in order for
the entertainment; meeting with his Guests at their entrance into the Wood,
welcomes and conducts them to his Bower. Where, by the way he receives the
relation of the sad Shep'ard Eglamour, who is fallen into a deep Melancholy,
for the loss of his beloved Earine; reported to have been drowned in passing
over the Trent, some few days before. They endeavor in what they can to
comfort him: but, his disease having taken so strong root, all is in vain, and
they are forced to leave him. In the mean time Marian is come from hunting
with the Hunts-men, where the Lovers interchangeably express their loves.
Robin-hood enquires if she hunted the Dear at force, and what sport he made,
now long he stood, and what head he bore: All which is briefly answered with
a relation of breaking him up, and the Raven, and her Bone. The suspect had of
that Raven to be Maudlin, the Witch of Paple-wick, whom one of the Huntsmen met
in the morning, at the rowsing of the Dear, and is confirmed by her being then
in Robin-hoods Kitchen, in the Chimney-corner, broyling the same bit, which was
thrown to the Raven, at the Quarry or Fall of the Dear. Marian being gone in,
to show the Dear to some of the Shepherdesses, returns instantly to the Scene
discontented, sends away the Venison she had killed, to her they call the
Witch, quarrels with her Love Robin-hood, abuses him, and his Guests the
Shep'erds; and so departs, leaving them all in wonder and perplexity

HE that has feasted you these forty years,
And fitted Fables, for your finer ears,
Although at first, he scarce could hit the bore;
Yet you, with patience harkning more and more,
At length have grown up to him, and made known,
The Working of his Pen is now your own:
He pray's you would vouchsafe, for your own sake,
To hear him this once more, but, sit awake.
And though he now present you with such wool,
As from mere English Flocks his Muse can pull,
He hopes when it is made up into Cloth;
Not the most curious head here will be loath
To wear a Hood of it; it being a Fleece,
To match, or those of Sicily, or Greece.
His Scene is Sherwood: i And his Play a Tale
Of Robin-hood's inviting from the Vale
Of Be'voir, all the Shep'ards to a Feast:
Where, by the casual absence of one Guest,
The Mirth is troubled much, and in one Man
As much of sadness shown, as Passion can.
The sad young Shep'ard, whom we here present,

For his lost Love; who in the Trent is said,
To have miscarried; 'lasse! what knows the head
Of a calm River, whom the feet have drowned?
Hear what his sorrows are; and, if they wound
Your gentle breasts, so that the End crown all,
Which in the Scope of one days chance may fall:
Old Trent will send you more such Tales as these,
And shall grow young again, as one does please.
But here is an Heresy of late let fall;
That Mirth by no means fits a Pastoral;
Such say so, who can make none, he presumes:
Else, there is no Scene, more properly assumes
The Sock. For whence can sport in kind arise,
But from the Rural Routs and Families?
Safe on this ground then, we not fear to day,
To tempt your laughter by our rustic Play.
Wherein if we distaste, or be cried down,
We think we therefore shall not leave the Town;
Nor that the Fore-wits, that would draw the rest
Unto their liking, always like the best.
The wise, and knowing Critic will not say,
This worst, or better is, before he weigh;
Where every piece be perfect in the kind:
And then, though in themselves he difference find,
Yet if the place require it where they stood,
The equal fitting makes them equal good.
You shall have Love and Hate, and Jealousy,
As well as Mirth, and Rage, and Melancholy:
Or whatsoever else may either move,
Or stir affections, and your likings prove.
But that no style for Pastoral should go
Current, but what is stamped with Ah, and O;
Who judges so, may singularly err;
As if all Poesy had one Character:
In which what were not written, were not right,
Or that the man who made such one poor flight,
In his whole life, had with his winged skill
Advanced him upmost on the Muses hill.
When he like Poet yet remains, as those
Are Painters who can only make a Rose.
From such your wits redeem you, or your chance,
Lest to a greater height you do advance
Of Folly, to contemn those that are known
Artificers, and trust such as are none.
HEre! she was wont to go! and here! and here!
Just where those Daisies, Pincks, and Violets grow:
The world may find the Spring by following her;
For other print her aerie steps near left:
Her treading would not bend a blade of grass!
Or shake the downie Blow-ball from his stalk!
But like the soft West-wind, she shot along,
And where she went, the Flowers took thickest root,
As she had sowed 'hem with her odorous foot.

Know you, or can you guess, my merry men,
What it is that keeps your Master Robin-hood
So long both from his Marian, and the Wood?

Forsooth, Madam, he will be here by noone,
And prays it of your bounty as a boon,
That you by then have killed him Venison some,
To feast his jolly friends, who hither come
In threaves to frolic with him, and make cheer;
Here Is Little John has harbord you a Dear,
I see by his tackling.

And a Heart of ten,
I trow he be, Madam, or blame your men:
For by his Slot, his Entries, and his Port,
His Frayings, Fewmets, he does promise sport,
And standing before the Dogs; he bears a head,
Large, and well beamed: with all rights somm'd, and spread.

Let Us rowse him quickly, and lay on the Hounds.

Scathlock is ready with them on the grounds;
So is his brother Scarlet: now they'ave found
His Layre, they have him sure within the pound.

Away then, when my Robin bids a Feast,
'Twere sin in Marian to defraud a Guest.

And I, the Chaplain, here am left to be
Steward to day, and charge you all in fee,
To d'on your Liveries; see the Bowerdrest;
And fit the fine devises for the Feast:
You George must care to make the Baldrick trim,
And Garland that must crown, or her, or him;
Whose Flock this year, has brought the earliest Lamb!

Good Father Tuck, at your Commands I am
To cut the Table out O the green sword,
Or any other service for my Lord;
To carve the Guests large seats; and these laid in
With turfe (as soft and smooth as the Moles skin:)
And hang the bulled Nose-gaies 'bove their heads,
The Pipers banck, whereon to sit and play;
And a fair Dyall to meet out the day.
Our Masters Feast shall want no just delights:
His entertainments must have all the rites.

I, and all choice that plenty can send in;
Bread, Wine, Acates, Foul, Feather, Fish, or Fin,
Trent.

And have you found her?

Whom?

My drowned Love.
Earine! the sweet Earine!
The bright, and beautiful Earine!
Have you not heard of my Earine?
Just by your Fathers Mills (I think I am right)
Are not you Much the Millers son?

I am.

And Baily to brave Robin-hood?

The same.

Close by your Fathers Mills, Earine!
Earine was drowned! O my Earine!
(Old Maudlin tells me so, and Douce her Daughter)
Have you swept the River say you? and not found her?

For Foul, and Fish we have.

O not for her?
You'are goodly friends! right charitable men!
Nay, keep your way, and leave me: make your toys,
Your tales, your poesies, that you talked of; all
Your entertainments: you not injure me:
Only if I may enjoy my Cipresse wreath!
And you will let me weep! ('it is all I ask;)
Till I be turned to water, as was she!
And troth what less suit can you grant a man?

His Fantasy is hurt, let us now leave him:
The wound is yet too fresh, to admit searching.

Searching? where should I search? or on what track?
Can my slow drop of tears, or this dark shade
About my brows, enough describe her loss!
Earine, O my Earine's loss!
No, no, no, no; this heart will break first.

How will this sad disaster strike the ears
Of bounteous Robin-hood, our gentle Master?

How will it mar his mirth, abate his feast;
And strike a horror into every guest!

If I could knit whole clouds about my brows,
And weep like Swithen, or those watery signs,
The Kids that rise then, and drown all the Flocks
Of those rich Shepherds, dwelling in this Vale;
Those careless Shepherds, that did let her drown!
Then I did something or could make old Trent
Drunk with my sorrow, to start out in breaches
To drown their Herds, their cattle, and their corn,
Break down their Mils, their Dams, ore-turne their weeres,
And see their houses, and whole livelihood
Wrought into water, with her, all were good:
I Would kiss the torrent, and those whirles of Trent,
That sucked her in, my sweet Earine!
When they have cast their body on the shore,
And it comes up, as tainted as themselves,
All pale and bloodlesse, I will love it still,
For all that they can do, and make 'hem mad,
To see how I will hug it in mine arms!
And hang upon the looks, dwell on her eyes:
Feed round about her lips, and eat her kisses!
Suck of her drowned flesh! and where is their malice?
Not all their envious sousing can change that:
But I will study some revenge past this!
I pray you give me leave, for I will study.
Though all the Bells, Pipes, Tabors, Timburines ring
That you can plant about me: I will study.

Welcome bright Clarion, and sweet Mellifleur,
The courteous Lionel, fair Amie; all
My friends and neighbors, to the Jolly Bower
Of Robin-hood, and to the greene-wood Walks:
Now that the shearing of your sheep is done,
And the washed Flocks are lighted of their wool,
The smoother Ewes are ready to receive.
The mounting Rams again; and both do feed,
As either promised to increase your breed
At eaning time; and bring you lusty twins.
Why should, or you, or we so much forget
The season in our selves: as not to make
Use of our youth, and spirits, to awake
The nimble Horne-pipe, and the Timburine,
And mix our Songs, and Dances in the Wood,
And each of us cut down a Triumph-bough.
Such were the Rites, the youthful June allow.

They were, gay Robin, but the sowrer sort
Of Shepherds now disclaim in all such sport:
And say, our Flocks the while, are poorly fed,
When with such vanities the Swains are led.

Would they, wise Clarion, were not hurried more
With Covetise and Rage, when to their store
They add the poor man's Eaneling, and dare sell
Both Fleece, and Carcass, not gi'ing him the Fell.
When to one Goat, they reach that prickly weed,
Which makes all the rest forbear to feed;
Or strew Tods hairs, or with their tails do sweep
The dewy grass, to d'off the simpler sheep;
Or dig deep pits, their Neighbors Neat to vex,
To drown the Calves, and crack the Heifers necks.
Or with pretense of chasing thence the Brock,
Send in a curre to worrie the whole Flock.

O Friar, those are faults that are not seen,
Ours open, and of worst example been.
They call ours, Pagan pastimes, that infect
Our blood with ease, our youth with all neglect;
Our tongues with wantonness, our thoughts with lust,
And what they censure ill, all others must.

I do not know, what their sharp sight may see
Of late, but I should think it still might be
(As 'twas) a happy age, when on the Plains,
The Wood-men met the Damsells, and the Swains
The Neat'ards, Plow-men, and the Pipers loud,
And each did dance, some to the Kit, or Crowd,
Some to the Bag-pipe, some the Tabret-mov'd,
And all did either love, or were beloved.

The dextrous Shepherd then would try his sling,
Then dart his Hook at Daysies, then would sing.
Sometimes would wrestle.

I, and with a Less:
And give her a new garment on the grass;
After a course at Barley-breake, or Base.

And all these deeds were seen without offense,
Or the least hazard of their innocence.

Those charitable times had no mistrust.
Shepherds knew how to love, and not to lust.

Each minute that we lose thus, I confess,
Deserves a censure on us, more or less;
But that a sadder chance has given allay,
Both to the Mirth, and Music of this day.
Our fairest Shepherdess we had of late,
Here upon Trent, is drowned; for whom her mate
Young Aeglamour, a Swain, who best could tread
Our country dances, and our games did lead,
Lives like the melancholy Turtle, drowned
Deeper in woe, then she in water: crowned
With Yewgh and Cypressa, and will scarce admit
The Physic of our presence to his fit.

Sometimes he sits, and thinks all day, then walks,
Then thinks again; and sighs, weeps, laughs, and talks,
And, 'twixt his pleasing frenzy, and sad grief,
Is so distracted; as no sought relief,
By all our studies can procure his peace.

The passion finds in him that large increase,
As we doubt hourly we shall lose him too.

You should not cross him then what ere you do:
For Phant'sie stopped, will soon take fire, and burn
Into an anger, or to a Frenzy turn.

Nay, so we are advised by Alhen here,
A good sage Shepherd, who all-tho' he wear
An old worn hat and cloak, can tell us more
Then all the forward Fry, that boast their Lore.

See, yonder comes the brother of the Maid,
Young Karolin! how curious, and afraid
He is at once! willing to find him out,
And loath to'offend him.

Sure he is here about.

See where he sits.

It will be rare, rare, rare!
An exquisite revenge: but peace, no words!
Not for the fairest fleece of all the Flock;
If it be known before, it is all worth nothing!
I Will carve it on the trees, and in the turfe,
On every green sworth, and in every path,
Just to the Margin of the cruel Trent;
There will I knock the story in the ground,
In smooth great peble, and moss fill it round,
Till the whole Country read how she was drowned,
And with the plenty of salt tears thereshed,
Quite alter the complexion of the Spring.
Or I will get some old, old Grandam, thither,
Whose rigid foot but dipped into the water,
Shall strike that sharp and sudden cold, throughout,
As it shall loose all virtue; and those Nimphs,
Those treacherous Nimphs pulled in Earine;
Shall stand curled up, like Images of Ice;
And never thaw! mark, never! a sharp Justice:
Or stay, a better! when the years at hottest,
And that the Dog-starre fomes, and the streams boiles,
And curles, and works, and swells ready to sparkle:
To fling a fellow with a Fever in,
To set it all on fire, till it burn,
Blew as Scamander, before the walls of Troy;
When Vulcan leaped in to him, to consume him.

A deep hurt Phant'sie.

Do you not approve it?

Yes gentle Aeglamour, we all approve,
And come to gratulate your just revenge:
Which since it is so perfect, we now hope,
You Will leave all care thereof, and mix with us,
In all the profer'd solace of the Spring.

A Spring, now she is dead: of what, of thorns?
Briars, and Brambles? Thistles? Burs, and Dorks?
Cold Hemlock? Yewgh? the Mandrake, or the Box?
These may grow still; but what can spring beside?
Did not the whole Earth sicken, when she died?
As if there since did fall one drop of dew,
But what was wept for her! or any stalk
Did bear a Flower! or any branch a bloome;
After her wreath was made: In faith, in faith
You do not fair, to put these things upon me.
Which can in no sort be: Earine,
Who had her very being, and her name,
With the first knots, or buddings of the Spring,
Borne with the Prim rose, and the Violet,
Or earliest Roses blown: when Cupid smiled,
And Venus led the Graces out to dance,
And all the Flowers, and Sweets in Natures lap,
Leaped out and made their solemn Conjuration,
To last, but while she lived: Do not I know,
How the Vale withered the same Day? How Dove,
Deane, Eye, and Erwash, Idell, Snite, and Soar,
Each broke his Vrne, and twenty waters more,
That swelled proud Trent, shrunk themselves dry; that since,
No Sun, or Moon, or other cheerful Star
Looked out of heaven! but all the Cope was dark,
As it were hung so for her Exequies!
And not a voice or sound, to ring her knell:
But of that dismal pair, the scritching Owl;
And buzzing Hornet! hark, hark, hark the foul
Bird! how she flutters with her wicker wings!
Peace you shall hear her scritch.

Good Karolin sing,
Help to divert this Phant'sie.

All I can.
Though I am young, and cannot tell,
Either what Death, or Love is well,
Yet I have heard, they both bear darts,
And both do aim at humane hearts:
And then again, I have been told
Love wounds with heart, as Death with cold;
So that I fear, they do but bring
Extremes to touch, and mean one thing.
As in a ruin, we it call
One thing to be blown up, or fall;
Or to our end, like way may have,
By a flash of lightning, or a wave:
So Loves inflamed shaft, or brand,
May kill as soon as Deaths cold hand;
Except Loves fires the virtue have
To fright the frost out of the grave.

Do you think so? are you in that good heresy?
I mean opinion? If you be, say nothing:
I Will study it, as a new Philosophy,
But by my self alone: Now you shall leave me I
Some of these Nimphs, here will reward you; this
This pretty Maid, although but with a kiss,
Lived my Earine, you should have twenty:
For every line here, one I would allow 'hem
From mine own store, the treasure I had in her:
Now I am poor as you.

And I a wretch!

Yet keep an eye upon him, Karoline.

Alas that ever such a generous spirit,
As Aeglamours, should sink by such a loss.

The truest Lovers are least fortunate,
Looks all their Lives, and Legends; what they call
The Lovers Scriptures: Heliodores, or Tatij!
Longi! Eustathij! Prodomi! you will find it!
What think you Father?

I have known some few,
And read of more; wh'have had their dose, and deep,
Of these sharp bitter-sweets.

But what is this
To jolly Robin? who the Story is,
Of all beatitude in Love?

And told
Here every day, with wonder on the world.

And with fames voice.

Save that some folk delight
To blend all good of others, with some spite.

He, and his Marian, are the Sum and Talk
Of all, that breath here in the Greene-wood Walk.

Or Be'voir Vale?

The Turtles of the Wood.

The billing Pair.

And so are understood
For simple loves, and sampled lives beside.

Faith, so much virtue should not be envied.

Better be so, then pitied Mellifleur!
For' against all envy, virtue is a cure;
But wretched pity ever calls on scorns.
The Deeres brought home: I hear it by their horns.

My Marian, and my Mistress!

My loved Robin!

The Moons at full, the happy pair are met!

How has this morning paid me, for my rising!
First, with my sports; but most with meeting you!
I did not half so so well reward my hounds,
As she has me to day: although I gave them
All the sweet morsels, called Tongue, Ears, and Dowcets!

What? and the inch-pin?

Yes.

Your sports then pleased you?

You are a wanton.

One I do confess
I wanted till you came, but now I have you,
I Will grow to your embraces, till two souls
Distilled into kisses, through our lips
Do make one spirit of love.

O Robin! Robin!

Breathe, breathe a while, what says my gentle Marian?

Could you so long be absent?

What a week?
Was that so long?

How long are Lovers weeks!
Do you think Robin, when they are asunder?
Are they not Prisoners years?

To some they seem so;
But being met again, they'are Schoole-boyes hours.

That have got leave to play, and so we use them.

Had you good sport in your chase to day?

O prime!

A lusty Stagge?

And hunted ye at force?

In a full cry.

And never hunted change!

You had stanch Hounds then?

Old and sure, I love
No young rash dogs, no more then changing friends.

What relayes set you?

None at all; we laid not
In one fresh dog.

He stood not long then?

Yes,
Five hours and more. A great, large Dear!

What head?

Forked! A Heart of ten.

He is good Venison,
According to the season in the blood,
I Will promise all your friends, for whom he fell.

But at his fall there hap't a chance.

Worth mark?

I! what was that sweet Marian

You Will not hear?

I love these interruptions in a Story;
They make it sweeter.

You do know, as soon
As the Assay is taken.

On my Marian.
I did but take the Assay.

You stop ones mouth,
And yet you bid 'hem speak -- when the Arbors made.

Pulled down, and paunch turned out.

He that undoes him;
Does cleave the brisket-bone, upon the spoone
Of which, a little gristle grows, you call it --

the Ravens-bone.

Now, ore head sat a Raven!
On a sere bough! a grown great Bird! and Hoarse!
Who, all the while the Dear was breaking up,
So crok'd and cried for it, as all the hunts-men,
(Especially old Scathlocke) thought it ominous!
Swore it was Mother Maudlin; whom he met,
At the Day-dawne; just as he roused the Dear,
Out of his Laire: but we made shift to run him
Off his four legs, and sunk him e're we left.
Is the Dear come?

He lies within o the dresser!

Will you go see him Mellifleur?

I attend you.

Come Amie, you will go with us?

I am not well.

She Is sick of the young Shep'ard that be kissed her.

Friend, cheer your friends up, we will eat him merrily,

Saw you the Raven, Friend?

I, qu'ha should let me?
I should be afraid o you sir should I?

Hunts-man!
A Dram more of Civilitie would not hurt you?

Nay, you must give them all their rudenesses;
They are not else themselves, without their language.

And what do you think of her?

As of a Witch.
They call her a Wise-woman, but I think her
An arrant Witch.

And wherefore think you so?

Because, I saw her since, broiling the bone
Was cast her at the Quarrie.

Where saw you her?

IN the Chimley nuik, within: she is there, now.

Your Hunt holds in his tale, still; and tells more!
My Hunt? what tale?

How! cloudie, Marian!
What look is this?

A fit one, Sir, for you.
Hand off rude Ranger! Sirrah, get you in
And bear the Venison hence. It is too good
For these course rustic mouths that cannot open,
Or spend a thank for it. A starved Muttons carcass
Would better fit their palates. See it carried
To Mother Maudlins, whom you call the Witch, Sir.
Tell her I sent it to make merry with,
She Will turn us thanks at least! why stand'st thou, Groom?

I wonder he can move! that he is not fixed!
If that his feeling be the same with mine!
I dare not trust the faith of mine own senses.
I fear mine eyes, and ears! this is not Marian!
Nor am I Robin-hood! I pray you ask her!
Ask her good Shep'ards! ask her all for me;
Or rather ask yourselves, if she be she;
Or I, be I.

Yes, and you are the spy:
And the spied Spy, that watch upon my walks,
To inform what Dear I kill, or give away!
Where! when! to whom! but spy your worst, good Spy!
I will dispose of this where least you like!
Fall to your cheese-cakes, curdes, and clawted cream,
Your fools, your flaunes; and of ale a stream
To wash it from your livers: strain ewes milk
Into your Cider sillabubs, and be drunk
To him, whose Fleece has brought the earliest Lamb
This year; and wears the Baudrick at your board!
Where you may all go whistle; and record


I pray you friends, do you hear? and see, as I do?
Did the same accents strike your ears? and objects?
Your eyes, as mine?

We taste the same reproaches!

Have seen the changes!

Are we not all changed,
Transformed from our selves?

I do not know!
The best is silence!

And to await the issue.

The dead, or lazy wait for it: I will find it.

THe Witch Maudlin, having taken the shape of Marian to abuse Robin-hood, and
perplexe his guests, comes forth with her daughter Douce, reporting in what
confusion she has left them; defrauded them, of their Venison; made them
suspicious each of the other; but most of all Robin-hood so jealous of his
Marian, as she hopes no effect of love would ever reconcile them; glorying so
far in the extent of her mischief, as she confesses to have surpised
Earine, stripped her of her garments, to make her daughter appear fine, at this
feast, in them; and to have shut the maiden up in a tree, as her sons prize,
if he could win her; or his prey, if he would force her. Her Son a rude
bragging swine'ard, comes to the tree to woo her (his Mother, and Sister
stepping aside, to over-heare him) and first boasts his wealth to her, and his
possessions; which move not. Then he presents her gifts, such as himself is
taken with, but she utterly shows a scorn, and loathing both of him, and
them. His mother is angry, rates him, instructs him what to do the next time,
and persuades her daughter, to show her self about the bower: tells, how she
shall know her mother, when she is transformed, her broidered belt. Mean while
the young sheep'ardes Amy being kissed by Karolin, Earines brother, before, falls
in Love; but knows not what Love is: but describes her disease so innocently,
that Marian pitties her. When Robin-hood, and the rest of his Guests invited,
enter to Marian, upbraiding her with sending away their Venison to Mother
Maudlin by Scathlock, which she denies; Scatchlock affirms it, but seeing his
Mistres weep, and to forswear it, begins to doubt his own understanding,
rather then affront her farther; which makes Robin-hood, and the rest, to
examine themselves better. But Mandlin entering like her self, the Witch comes
to thank her for her bounty: at which, Marian is more angry, and more denies
the deed. Scathlock enters, tells he has brought it again, and delivered it to
the Cook. The Witch is inwardly vexed, the Venison is so recovered from her, by
the rude Huntsman; and murmurs, and curses, bewitches the Cook, mocks poor
Amie, and the rest, discovers her ill nature, and is a mean of reconciling
them all. For the sage Shepherd, suspecteth her mischeife, if she be not
prevented: and so persuades to seize on her. Whereupon Robin-hood dispatcheth
out his woodmen to hunt, and take her. which ends the Act

HAve I not left 'em in a brave confusion?
Amazed their expectation? got their Venison?
Troubled their mirth, and meeting? made them doubtful,
And jealous of each other? all distracted?
And, in the close, uncertain of themselves?
This can your Mother do my dainty Douce!
Take any shape upon her! and delude
The senses, best acquainted with their Owners!
The jolly Robin, who' has bid this feast,
And made this solemn invitation;
I have possessed so, with syke dislikes
Of his own Marian, that all-bee 'he know her,
As does the vauting heart, his venting hind,
He nere fra' hence, sall neis her in the wind,
To his first liking.

Did you so distate him?

As far as her proud scorning him, could 'bate
Or blunt the edge of any Lovers temper.

But were ye like her mother?

So like Douce,
As had she seen me her sel', her sell 'had doubted
Whether had been the liker off the two!
This can your Mother do, I tell you Daughter!
I have but dight ye, yet; in the out-dresse;
And 'parraile of Earine! but this raiment,
These very weeds, sall make ye, as but coming
In view or ken of Aeglamour, your form
Shall show too slipperie to be looked upon!
And all the Forest swear you to be she!
They shall rin after ye, and wage the odds,
Upo' their own deceived sights, yee' are her!
Whilst she (poor Less) is stocked up in a tree:
Your brother Lorells prize! For so my largess,
Has lotted her, to be your brothers Mistress;
Gif she can be reclaimed: gif not, his Prey!
And here he comes, new claithed, like a Prince
Of Swine ards! sike he seems! dight in the spoils
Of those he feeds! A mighty Lord of Swine!
He is command now, to woo. Lets step aside,
And hear his love-craft! See, he opes the door!
And takes her by the hand, and helps her forth!
This is true court-ship, and becomes his ray.

Ye kind to others, but ye coy to me
Deft Mistres! whiter then the cheese, new pressed!
Smoother then cream! and softer then the curds!
Why start ye from me, ere ye hear me tell
My wooing errand; and what rents I have?
Large herds, and pastures! Swine, and Kie, mine own!
And though my na'se be camus'd, my lips thick,
And my chin bristled! Pan, great Pan, was such!
Who was the chief of Heards-men, and our Sire!
I am na' Fay! na' Incubus! na' Changlin!
But a good man, that lives of my own geere.
This house! these grounds! this stock is all mine own!

How better 'twere to me, this were not known!

She likes it not: but it is boasted well!

An hundred Udders for the payle I have,
That gi' me Milk and Curds, that make me Cheese
To cloy the Mercatts! twenty swarm of Bees,
Whilke (all the Summer) hum about the hive,
And bring me Wax, and Honey in by live.
An aged Oak the King of all the field,
With a broad Beech there grows before my dur,
That mickell Mast unto the ferme does yield.
A Chestnut, whilk has larded money a Swine,
Whose skins I wear, to fend me fra the Cold.
A Pop^^^ green, and with a kerved Seat,
Under whose shade I solace in the heat;
And thence can see gang out, and in, my neat.
Two trilland brooks, each (from his spring) does meet,
And make a river, to refresh my feet:
In which, each morning ere the Sun does rise,
I look my self, and clear my pleasant eyes,
Before I pipe; For, therein I have skill
'Bove other Swine'ards. Bid me, and I will
Straight play to you, and make you melody.

By no means. Ah! to me all minstrelsie
Is irksome, as are you.

Why scorn you me?

I am a Lord of other geere! this sine
Smooth Bawsons Cub, the young Grice of a Gray;
Two tynie Urshins, and this Ferret gay.

Out on 'hem! what are these?

I give 'hem ye;
As presents Mrs.

O, the feind, and thee!
Gar take them hence: they few mand all the claithes,
And prick my Coats: hence with 'hem, limmer lowne,
Thy vermin, and thy self, thy felfe art one;
I lock me up. All Is well when thou art gone.

Did you hear this? she wished me at the feind,
With all my presents!

A tu luckie end
She wishend thee, foul Limmer! drittie Lowne!
Good faith, it duills me that I am thy Mother!
And see, thy Sister scorns thee, for her Brother!
Thou woo thy Love? thy Mistress? with two Hedge-hoggs?
A stinkand brock? a polcat? out thou houlet!
Thou shoul'dst ha'given her, a Madge-Owle! and then
Though had made a present of thy self, Owle-spiegle!

Why, Mother, I have heard ye bid to give;
And often, as the Cause calls.

I know well,
It is a witty part, sum-times, to give.
But what? to whame? no monsters! nor to maidens!
He should present them with mare pleasand things,
Things natural, and what all women covet
To see: the common Parent of us all!
Which Maids will twire at, 'tween their fingers, thus!
With which his Sire gat him! He Is get another!
And so beget posterity upon her!
This he should do! (false Gelden) gang thy gait
And du thy turns, betimes: or, I'is gar take
Thy new breikes fra' thee, and thy duib let tu.
The Talleur, and the Sowter sall undu'
All they have made; except thou manlier woo!

Good Mother, gif you chide him, he will du wairs.

Hang him: I geif him to the Devils eirs.
But, ye my Douce, I charge ye, show your sell,
Tu all the Sheep'ards, baudly: gaing amang'hem.
Be mickell in their eye, frequent, and fuge and.
And, gif they ask ye of Earine,
Or of these claithes; say, that I ga' hem ye,
And say no more. I have that wark in hand,
That web upo' the Luime, sall gar 'hem think
By then, they feelin their own frights, and fears,
I'is pu' the world, or Nature, bout their ears.
But, hear ye Douce, because, ye may meet me
In money shapes tu day; where ere you spy
This browdred belt, with Characters, it is I.
A Gypsan Lady, and a right Beldame,
Wrought it by Moone-shine for me, and Starlight,
Upo' your Granams grave, that very night
We eathed her, in the shades; when our Dame Hecat,
Made it her gaing-night, over the Kirk-yard,
Withal the bark and parish tykes set at her,
While I sat whyrland, of my brazen spindle:
At every twisted third my rock let fly
Unto the sew'ster, who did sit me nigh,
Under the towne-turne-pike; which ran each spell
She stitched in the work, and knit it well.
See, ye take tent to this, and ken 'your Mother.

How do you sweet Amie? yet?

She cannot tell,
If she could sleep, she says, she should do well.
She feels a hurt, but where, she cannot show
Any least sign, that she is hurt or no.
Her paine's not doubtful to her; but the seat
Of her pain is. Her thoughts too work, and beat,
Oppressed with Cares: but why, she cannot say.
All matter of her care is quite away.

Has any Vermin broke into your Fold?
Or any rott seized on your flock? or cold?
Or has your feighting Ram, burst his hard horn?
Or any Ewe her fleece? or bag has torn,
My gentle Amie? Am. Marian, none of these.

Have you been stung by Waspes, or angry Bees?
Or razed with some rude bramble, or rough briar?

No Marian; my disease is somewhat nigher.
I weep, and boil away my Self, in tears;
And then my panting heart would dry those fears:
I burn, though all the Forest lend a shade;
And freize, though the whole Wood one fire were made.

Alas!

I often have been torn with thorn and briar;
Both in the Leg, and Foot, and somewhat higher:
Yet gave not then such fearful shreikes as these. Ah!
I often have been stung too, with cursed Bees,
Yet not remember that I then did quit
Either my Company, or Mirth for it. Ah!
And therefore, what it is that I feel now,
And know no cause of it, nor where, nor how,
It entered in me, nor least print can see,
I feel afflicts me more, then Briar, or Be. Oh!
How often, when the Sun heavens brightest birth
Has with his burning fervor cleft the earth,
Under a spreading Elm, or Oak, hard by
A cool clear fountain, could I sleeping lie
Safe from the heat? but now, no shadie tree,
Nor purling brook, can my refreshing be?
Often when the meadows, were grown rough with frost,
The rivers ice-bound, and their currents lost,
My thick warm fleece I wore, was my defense
Or large good fires, I made, drove winter thence.
But now, my whole flocks fells, nor this thick grove,
Enflamed to ashes, can my cold remove.
It is a cold, and heat, that does out go
All sense of Winters, and of Summers so.

OF, are you here, my Mistress?

I my Love!
Where should I be, but in my Robins arms?
The Sphere which I delight in, so to move?

What the rude Ranger? and spied Spy? hand off:
You are for no such rusticks.

What means this,
Thrice worthy Clarion? or wise Alken? know ye?

Alas no, not they! a poor sterv'd Muttons carcass
Would better fit their palat's, then your Venison.

What riddle is this! unfold your self, dear Robin.

You have not sent your Venison hence by Scathlock,
To Mother Maudlin?

I to Mother Maudlin?
Will Scathlock say so?

Nay, we will all swear so.
For all did hear it, when you gave the charge so.
Both Clarion, Alken, Lionel, my self.

Good honest Shep'ards, Masters of your flocks,
Simple, and virtuous men, no others hirelings;
Be not you made to speak against your Conscience,
That which may soil the truth. I send the Venison
Away? by Scathlock? and to mother Maudlin?
I came to show it here, to Mellifleur,
I do confess; but Amies falling ill,
Did put us of it:
In comforting of her. OF, here he is!
Did I, Sir, bid you bear away the Venison,
To mother Maudlin?

I good faith, Madam,
Did you, and I have done it.

What have you done?

Obeyed your hests, Madam; done your Commands.

Done my Commands, dull groom? Fetch it again
Or kennel with the hounds. Are these the Arts
Robin, you read your rude ones of the wood,
To countenance your quarrels, and mistakings?
Or are the sports to entertain your friends
Those formed jealousies? Ask of Mellifleur,
If I were ever from her, here, or Amie,
Since I came in with them; or saw this Scathlock,
Since I related to you his tale, of the Raven?



She never left my side
Since I came in, here, nor I hers.

This's strange!
Our best of Senses were deceived, our eyes, then!

And ears too.

What you have concluded on,
Make good I pray you.

OF my heart, my heart!

My heart it is, is wounded pretty Amie;
Report not you your greifes: I Will tell for all.

Some body is to blame, there is a fault.

Try if you can take rest. A little slumber
Will much refresh you (Amie).

What Is her grief?

She does not know: and therein she is happy.

Here Is Mother Maudlin come to give you thanks,
Madam, for some late gift, she has received --
Which she is not worthy of, she says, but crakes,
And wonders of it; hoppes about the house;


Send me a Stagge!
A whole Stagge, Madam! and so fat a Dear!
So fairelie hunted, and at such a time too!
When all your friends were here!

Do you mark this, Clarion?
Her own acknowledgement?

'Twas such a bounty
And honor done to your poor Bedes-woman,
I know not how to owe it, but to thank you.
And that I come to du: I shall go round,

Look out, look out, gay folk about,
And see me spin; the ring IN am in
Of mirth, and glee, with thanks for fee
The heart putts on, for the Venison
My Lady sent, which shall be spent
In draughts of Wine, to fume up fine
Into the brain, and down again
Fall in a Swoune, upo' the grown.

Look to her, she is mad.

My Son has sent you
A pott of Strawberries, gathered in the wood
(His Hoggs would else have rooted up, or trod)
With a choice dish of wildings here, to scald
And mingle with your Cream.

Thank you good Maudlin,
And thank your Son. Go, bear 'hem into Much
The Acater, let him thank her. Surely, Mother
You were mistaken, or my Woodmen more,
Or most my self, to send you all our store
Of Venison, hunted for our selves, this day!
You will not take it, Mother, I dare say,
If wee'lld entreat you; when you know our ghests:
Red Dear is head still of the forest feasts.

But I know ye, a right free-hearted Lady,
Can spare it out of superfluity:
I have departit it among my poor Neighbors
To speak your Largess.

I not gave it, Mother;
You have done wrong. then; I know how to place
My gifts, and where; and when to find my seasons
To give, not throw away my Courtesies.

Count you this thrown away?

What Is ravished from me
I count it worse; as stolen: I loose my thanks.
But leave this quest: they fit not you, not me,
Maudlin, Contentions of this quality.
How now?

Your Stag's returned upon my shoulders,
He has found his way into the Kitchen again:
With his two Legs, If now your Cook can dress him;
Slid, I thought the Swine'ard would have be at me,
He looks so big! the sturdie Karle, lewd Lorel!

There Scathlock, for thy plines, thou have deserved it.

Do you give a thing, and take a thing, Madam?

No, Maudlin, you had imparted to your Neighbors;
As much good do it them: I have done no wrong.

The Spit stand still, no Broches turn
Before the fire, but let it burn
Both sides, and haunches, till the whole
Converted be into one Cole.

What Devils Pater noster mumbles she?

Stay, you will hear more of her witcherie

The Swilland Dropsy enter in
The Lazy Cuke, and swell his skin;
And the old Mort-malon his shin
Now prick, and itch, withouten blin.

Speak out Hagge, we may hear your Devils Mattens.

The Paene, we call S. Antons fire
The Gout, or what we can desire,
To crampe a Cuke, in every lim,
Before they dine, yet; seize on him.

A soul ill Spirit has possessed her.

O Karol, Karol, call him back again.

Her thoughts do work upon her, in her slumber.
And may express some part of her disease.

Observe, and mark, but trouble not her ease.

OF, o.

How is it Amie?

Wherefore start you?

OF Karol, he is fair, and sweet.

What then?
Are there not flowers as sweet, and fair, as men?
The Lilly is fair! and Rose is sweet!

IN, so!
Let all the Roses, and the Lillies go:
Karol is only fair to me!

And why?

Alas for Karol, Marian, I could die.

He sings sweetly too!

What then?
Are there not Birds sing sweeter far, then Men?

I grant the Linet, Lark, and Bul-finchsing,
But best, the dear, good Angel of the Spring,
The Nightingale.

Then why? then why, alone,
Should his notes please you?

I not long agone
Took a delight, with wanton kidds to play,
And sport with little Lambs a Summers Day!
And view their friskes! me thought it was a sight
Of joy, to see my two brave Rams to fight!
Now Karol, only, all delight does move!
All that is Karol, Karol I approve!
This very morning, but -- (I did bestow
(It was a little against my will, I know)
A single kiss, upon the seely Swain,
And now I wish that very kiss again.
His lip is softer, sweeter then the Rose
His mouth, and tongue with dropping honey flows.
The relish of it was a pleasing thing.

Yet like the Bees it had a little sting.

And sunk, and sticks yet in my marrow deep
And what does hurt me, I now wish to keep.

Alas, how innocent her Story is!

I do remember, Marian, I have often
With pleasure kissed my Lambs, and Puppies, soft,
And once a dainty fine Roe-fawne I had,
Of whose out-skipping bounds, I was as glad
As of my health; and him I often would kiss:
Yet had his, no such sting, or pain, as this.
They never pricked or hurt my heart. And, for
They were so blunt, and dull, I wish no more.
But this, that hurtes, and pricks does please; This sweet,
Mingled with sower, I wish again to meet:
And that delay, me thinks, most tedious is
That keeps, or hinders me of Karols kiss.

We Will send for him sweet Amie, to come to you.



Do you mark the murmuring hagge, how she does mutter?

I like her not. And less her manners now.

She is a shrewd deformed piece, I vow.

As crooked as her body.

I believe
She can take any Shape; as Scathlock says.

She may deceive the Sense, but really
She cannot change her self.

Would I could see her,
Once more in Marians form! for I am certain
Now, it was she abused us; as I think
My Marian, and my Love, now, innocent:
Which faith I seal unto her, with this kiss,
And call you all to witness of my penance.

It was believed before, but now confirmed,
That we have seen the Monster.

Hear you how
Poor Tom, the Cook, is taken! All his joints
Do crack, as if his Limbs were tied with points:
His whole frame slackens; and a kind of rack
Runs down along the Spondylls of his back;
A Gowt, or Crampe, now seizes on his head,
Then falls into his feet; his knees are lead;
And he can stir his either hand, no more
Then a dead stumpe, to his office, as before.

He is bewitched.

This is an Argument
Both of her malice, and her power, we see.

She must by some device restrained be,
Or she will go far in mischief.

Advise how,
Sage Shep'ard, we shall put it straight in practice.

Send forth your woodmen, then, into the walks,
Or let them prick her footing hence; A Witch
Is sure a Creature of Melancholy,
And will be found, or sitting in her form,
Or else, at releife, like a Hare.

You speak
Alken, as if you knew the sport of Witch-hunting,
Or starting of a Hag.

Go sirs about it,
Take George here with you, he can help to find her;
Leave Tuck, and Much behind to dress the Dinner,
IN the Cooks stead.

We Will care to get that done.

Come Marian, lets withdraw into the bower.

Rare sport I swear! this hunting of the Witch
Will make us.

Let Us advise upon it, like huntsmen.

And we can spy her once, she is our own.

First, think which way she fourmeth, on what wind:
Or North, or South.

For, as the Shep'ard said,
A Witch is a kind of Hare.

And marks the weather,
As the hare does.

Where shall we hope to find her?

I have asked leave to assist you, jollie huntsmen,
If an old Shep'herd may be heard among you;
Not jear'd or laughed at.

Father, you will see
Robin-hoods household, know more Courtesy.

Who scorns at eld, peeles of his own young hairs.

Ye say right well. Know ye the Witches Dell?

No more then I do know the walks of Hell.

Within a gloomie dimble, she does dwell
Down in a pit, ore-growne with brakes and briars.
Close by the ruins of a shaken Abbey
Torn, with an Earthquake, down unto the ground,
Amongst graves, and grotts, near an old Charnell house,
Where you shall find her sitting in her form,
As fearful, and melancholique, as that
She is about; with Caterpillars kells,
And knottie Cobwebs, rounded in with spells;
Thence she steals forth to releif, in the foggs,
And rotten Mistes, upon the fens, and boggs,
Down to the drowned Lands of Lincolneshire;
To make Ewes cast their Lambs! Swine eat their Farrow!
The House-wifes Tun not work! Nor the Milk churne!
Writhe Childrens wrists! and suck their breath in sleep!
Get Vialls of their blood! And where the Sea
Casts up his slimie Owze, search for a weed
To open locks with, and to rivet Charms,
Planted about her, in the wicked feat,
Of all her mischiefs, which are manifold.

I wonder such a story could be told,
Of her dire deeds.

I thought a Witches banks
Had enclosed nothing, but the merry prankes
Of some old woman.

Yes, her malice more!

As it would quickly appear, had we the Store
Of his Collects.

I, this good learned Man
Can speak her right.

He knows, her shifts, and haunts!

And all her wiles, and turns. The venomed Plants
Wherewith she kill's! where the sad Mandrake grows,
Whose groans are deathfull! the dead-numming Nightshade!
The stupifying Hemlock! Adders tongue!
And Martagan! the shreikes of lucklesse Owls,
We hear! and croaking Night-Crowes in the air!
Greene-bellied Snakes! blew fire-drakes in the sky!
And giddie Flitter-mice, with lether wings!
The scaly Beetles, with their habergeons,
That make a humming Murmur as they fly!
There, in the stocks of trees, white Faies do dwell,
And span-long Elves, that dance about a poole!
With each a little Changeling, in their arms!
The airie spirits play with falling stars!
And mount the Sphere of fire, to kiss the Moon!
While, she fitts reading by the Glow-wormes light,
Or rotten wood (over which the worm has crept)
The banefull scedule of her nocent charms,
And binding Characters, through which she wounds
Her Puppetts, the Sigilla of her witchcraft.
All this I know, and I will find her for you;
And show you'her sitting in her form; I Will lay
My hand upon her; make her throw her skutt
Along her back, when she does start before us.
But you must give her Law: and you shall see her
Make twenty leapes, and doubles; cross the paths,
And then squatt down beside us.

Crafty Croane!
I long to be at the sport, and to report it.

We Will make this hunting of the Witch, as famous, As any other blast of
Venerie

Hang her foul hagge, she will be a stinking Chase!
I had rather have the hunting of heir heir.

If we could come to see her, cry, so haw, once!

That I do promise, or I Am no good Hag-finder.

PUck-hairy discovers himself in the Forest, and discourses his offices with
their necessities, briefly; After which, Douce, entering in the habit of Earine,
is pursued by Karol; who mistaking her at first to be his Sister, questions
her, how she came by those garments. She answers, by her mothers gift. The
sad Shepherd coming in the while, she runs away affrighted, and leaves Karol,
suddenly; Aeglamour thinking it to be Earines ghost he saw, falls into a
melancholique expression of his phantsie to Karol, and questions him sadly
about that point, which moves compassion in Karol of his mistake still. When
Clarion, and Lionell enter to call Karol to Amie; Karol reports to them
Aeglamours passion, with much regreet. Clarion resolves to seek him. Karol to
return with Lionell. By the way Douce, and her Mother (in the shape of Marian)
meet them, and would divert them, affirming Amie to be recovered, which Lionell
wondered at to be so soon. Robin-hood enters, they tell him the relation of the
Witch, thinking her to be Marian; Robin suspecting her to be Maudlin, lay's
hold of her Girdle suddenly, but she striving to get free, they both run out,
and he returns with the belt broken. She following in her own shape,
demanding it, but at a distance, as fearing to be seized upon again; and
seeing she cannot recover it, falls into a rage, and cursing, resolving to
trust to her old arts, which she calls her daughter to assist in. The
Shepherds content with this discovery, go home triumphing, make the relation
to Marian. Amie is gladded with the sight of Karol, etc. In the mean time
enters Lorel, with purpose to ravish Earine, and calling her forth to that lewd
end, he by the hearing of Clarions footing, is staid, and forced to commit her
hastily to the tree again, where Clarion coming by, and hearing a voice
singing, draws near unto it, but Aeglamour hearing it also, and knowing it to
be Earine's, falls into a superstitious commendation of it, as being an
Angels, and in the air, when Clarion espies a hand put forth from the tree,
and makes toward it, leaving Aeglamour to his wild phantsie, who quitteth the
place, and Clarion beginning to court the hand, and make love to it, there
arises amist suddenly, which, darkning all the place, Clarion loses
himself, and the tree where Earine is enclosed, lamenting his misfortune, with
the unknown nimphs misery. The Air clearing, enters the Witch, with her Son
and Daughter, tells them how she had caused that late darkness, to free
Lorell from surprisall, and his prey from being reskued from him: bids him
look to her, and lock her up more carefully, and follow her, to assist a work,
she has in hand, of recovering her lost Girdle; which she laments the loss
of, with cursings, execrations, wishing confusion to their feast, and meeting:
sends her Son, and Daughter to gather certain Simples, for her purpose, and
bring them to her Dell. This Puck hearing prevents, and shows her error still.
The Hunts-men having found her footing, follow the tract, and prick after her.
She getts to her Dell, and takes her Form. Enter, Alken has spied her sitting
with her Spindle, Threads, and Images. They are eager to seize her presently,
but Alken persuades them to let her begin her charms, which they do. Her
Son and Daughter come to her, the Hunts-men are afrighted as they see her
work go forward. And over-hastie to apprehend her, she escapes them all, by
the help and delusions of Puck

THe Feind has much to do, that keeps a School;
Or is the Father of a family;
Or governes but a country Academie:
His labors must be great, as are his cares,
To watch all turns, and cast how to prevent 'hem.
This Dame of mine here,

grows high in evil,
And thinks she does all, when it is I, her Devil,
That both delude her, and must yet protect her:
She Is confident in mischeife, and presumes
The changing of her shape will still secure her.
But that may fail, and diverse hazards meet
Of other consequence, which I must look to.
Not let her be surpised on the first catch.
I must go dance about the Forest, now,
And firke it like a Goblin, till I find her.
Then will my service come worth acceptance;
When not expected of her, when the help
Meets the necessity, and both do kiss
It Is called the timing of a duty, this.

Sure, you are very like her! I conceived
You had been she, seeing you run before me:
For such a suite she made her against this Feast;
In all resemblance, or the very ^ame;
I saw her in it; had she lived to enjoy it
She had been there an acceptable Guest
To Marian, and the gentle Robin-hood,
Who are the Crown, and Ghirland of the Wood.

I cannot tell: my Mother gave it me,
And bad me wear it.

Who, the wise good Woman?
Old Maud. of Pappelwicke?

Yes, this sullen Man.
I cannot like him. I must take my leave

What said she to you?

Who? Aegl. Earine,
I saw her talking with you, or her Ghost;
For she indeed is drowned in old Trents bottom.
Did she not tell who would have pulled her in?
And had her Maidenhead upon the place?
The rivers brim, the margin of the Flood?
No ground is holy enough, (you know my meaning)
Lust is committed in Kings Palaces,
And yet their Majesty's not violated!
No words!

How sad, and wild his thoughts are! gone?

But she, as chaste, as was her name, Earine,
Died undeflowr'd; and now her sweet soul hovers,
Here, in the Air, above us; and does haste
To get up to the Moon, and Mercury;
And whisper Venus in her Orb, then spring
Up to old Saturn, and come down by Mars,
Consulting Jupiter; and seat her self
Just in the midst with Phoebus; tempring all
The jarring Spheeres, and giving to the World
Again, his first and tunefull planetting!
OF what an age will here be of new concords!
Delightful harmony! to rock old Sages,
Twice infants, in the Cradle o'Speculation,
And throw a silence upon all the creatures!

A Cogitation of the highest rapture!

The loudest Seas, and most enraged Winds
Shall lose their clangor; Tempest shall grow hoarse;
Loud Thunder dumb; and every speece of storm
Laid in the lap of listening Nature, hushed;
To hear the changed chime of this eighth spheere!
Take tent, and harken for it, loose it not.

OF, here is Karol! was not that the sad
Shep'erd, slipped from him?

Yes, I guess it was:
Who was that left you, Karol?

The last man!
Whom, we shall never see himself again;
Or ours, I fear! He starts away from hand, so,
And all the touches, or soft stroke of reason!
Ye can apply. No Colt is so unbroken!
Or hawke yet half so haggard, or unmann'd!
He takes all toies that his wild phantsy proffers,
And flies away with them. He now conceives
That my lost Sister, his Earine,
Is lately turned a Sphere amid the seven:
And reads a Musique-Lecture to the Planets!
And with this thought, he is run to call 'hem, Hearers*

Alas, this is a strayn'd, but innocent phant'sie!
I Will follow him, and find him, if I can:
Mean time, go you with Lionell, sweet Karol,
He will acquaint you with an accident
Which much desires your presence, on the place!

What is it, Lionell, wherein I may serve you?
Why do you so survey, and circumscribe me?
As if you stuck one Eye into my breast,
And with the other took my whole dimensions?

I wish you had a windo' in your bosom
Or 'i your back: I might look thorough you,
And see your in-parts, Karol, liver, heart;
For there the seat of Love is. Whence the Boy
(The winged Archer) has shot home a shaft
Into my sisters breast, the innocent Amie,
Who now cries out, upon her bed, on Karol,
Sweet singing Karol! the delicious Karol!
That kissed her like a Cupid! In your eyes,
She says, his stand is! and between your lipp's
He runs forth his divisions, to her ears,
But will not bide there, less your self do bring him
Go with me Karol, and bestow a visit
In charity, upon the afflicted Maid,
Who pineth with the languor of your love.

Whither intend you? Amy is recovered,

This Maiden has been with her from her Mother
Maudlin, the cunning Woman, who has sent her
Herbs for her head, and Simples of that nature,
Have wrought upon her a miraculous Cure;
Settled her brain, to all our wish, and wonder!

So instantly? you know, I now but left her.
Possessed with such a fit, almost to 'a frenzy;
Your self too feared her, Marian; and did urge
My haste, to seek out Karol, and to bring him.

I did so. But the skill of that wise woeman
And her great charity of doing good
Has by the ready hand of this deft less
Her daughter, wrought effects, beyond belief,
And to astonishment; we can but thank
And praise, and be amazed, while we tell it.

It Is strange, that any art should so help nature
In her extremes.

Then, it appears most real
When the other is deficient.

Wherefore,
Discoursing here, and haste not with your succors
To poor afflicted Amie, that so needs them?

She is recovered well, your Marian told us
But now here: See, she is returned to affirm it!

My Marian?

Robin-hood? Is he here?

Stay!
What was it you have told my friend?

Help, murder, help.
You will not rob me Outlaw? Theife, restore
My belt that ye have broken!

Yes, come near,

Not in your gripe.

Was this the charmed circle?
The Copy that so cozened, and deceived us?
I Will carry hence the trophie of your spoils.
My men shall hunt you too upon the start,
And course you soundly.

I shall make 'hem sport
And send some home, without their legs, or arms.
I Will teach 'hem to climb Styles, leap Ditches, Ponds,
And lie in the Waters, if they follow me.

Out murmuring Hagge.

I must use all my powers,
Lay all my wits to piecing of this loss.
Things run unluckily, Where Is my Puck-hairy?

Has he forsook me?

At your beck, Madame.

O Puck, my Goblin! I have lost my belt,
The strong theife, Robin Outlaw, forced it from me.

They are other Clouds and blacker threat you, Dame;
You must be wary, and pull in your sails,
And yield unto the wether of the tempest.
You think your power's infinite as your malice;
And would do all your anger prompts you to:
But you must wait occasions, and obey them:
Sail in an egg-shell, make a straw your mast,
A Cobweb all your Cloth, and pass, unseen,
Till you have escaped the rocks that are about you.

What rock's about me?

I do love, Madam,
To show you all your dangers, when you are past 'hem.
Come, follow me, I Will once more be your pilot,
And you shall thank me.

Lucky, my loved Goblin!
Where are you gaang, now?

Unto my tree,
To see my Maistres.

Gang thy gait, and try
Thy turns, with better luck, or hang thy sel'.


