Do you hear, you, Creature of diligence, and business! what is the affair,
that you pluck for so, under your cloak


Nothing, but what I color for, I assure you; and may encounter with, I hope,
if Luck favor me, the Gamsters Goddess


You are a Votary of hers, it seems by your language. What went you upon? may
a man ask you


Certainties, indeed Sir, and very good ones; the presentation of a Masque;
you will see it, anon


Sir, this is my room, and region too, the banqueting house. And in matter of
feast, the solemnity, nothing is to be presented here, but with my
acquaintance, and allowance to it


You are not his Majesty's Confectioner? Are you?


No, but one that has as good title to the room, his Master-Cooke. What are
you, Sir


The most unprofitable of his servants, I, Sir, the Poet. A kind of a Christmas
Ingine? one, that is used, at least once a year, for a trifling instrument, of
wit, or so


Were you ever a Cook?


A Cook? no surely.


Then you can be no good Poet: for a good Poet differs nothing at all from a
Master-Cooke. Eithers Art is the wisdom of the Mind


As how, Sir?


Expect. I am by my place, to know how to please the palates of the guests; so,
you, are to know the palate of the times: study the several tastes, what every
Nation, the Spaniard, the Dutch, the French, the Walloun, the Neapolitan, the
Brittan, the Sicilian, can expect from you


That were a heavy and hard task, to satisfy Expectation, who is so severe
an exactresse of duties; ever a tyrannous mistress: and most times a pressing
enemy


She is a powerful great Lady, Sir, at all times, and must be satisfied: So
must her sister, Madam Curiosity, who has as dainty a palate as she, and
these will expect


But, what if they expect more then they understand?


That Is all one, Mr. Poet. you are bound to satisfy them. For, there is a
palate of the Understanding, as well as of the Senses. The Taste is taken with
good relishes, the Sight with fair objects, the Hearing with delicate sounds,
the Smelling with pure sents, the feeling with soft and plumpe bodies, but the
Understanding with all these: for all which you must begin at the Kitchen.
There, the Art of Poetry was learned, and found out, or no where: and the same
day, with the Art of Cookery


I should have given it rather to the Cellar, if my suffrage had bin asked.


O, you are for the Oracle of the Bottle, I see; Hogshead Trismegistus: He is
your Pegasus. Thence flows the spring of your Muses, from that hoof

Seduced Poet, I do say to thee, --
A Boyler, Range, and Dresser were the fountains
Of all the knowledge, in the Universe,
And that is the Kitchen. Where, a Master-Cooke!
Thou do not know the man! nor can thou know him!
Till thou have served some years in that deep school,
That Is both the Nource, and Mother of the Arts,
And hear'st him read, interpret, and demonstrate.
A Master-Cooke! why, he is the man of men,
For a Professor! He designs, he draws,
He paints, he carves, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious foul, and fish,
Some he dry-ditches, some motes round with broths;
Mounts marrow-bones; cuts fifty-angled custards;
Reares bulwark pies; and, for his outer works,
He raises ramparts of immortal crust;
And teaches all the tacticks at one dinner:
What ranks, what files, to put his dishes in
The whole Art Military! Then he knows
The influence of the stars, upon his meats;
And all their seasons, tempers, qualities,
And so, to fit his relishes, and sauces!
He, has Nature in a pot! 'bove all the Chemists,
Or bare-breech'd brethren of the Rosie-Crosse!
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Soldier, a Physician, a Philosopher,
A general Mathematician!

It is granted.


And, that you may not doubt him for a Poet,


This Fury shows, if there were nothing else.
And it is divine!

Then, Brother Poet,


Brother.


I have a suite.


What is it?


Your devise.


As you came in upon me, I was then
Offering the argument, and this it is.

Silence.


The mighty Neptune, mighty in his styles,
And large command of waters, and of Isles,
Not, as the Lord and Sovereign of the Seas,
But, Chief in the art of riding, late did please
To send his Albion forth, the most his own,
Upon discovery, to themselves best known,
Through Celtiberia; and, to assist his course,
Gave him his powerful MANAGER of Horse,
With divine Proteus, Father of disguise,
To wait upon them with his counsels wise,
In all extremes. His great commands being done,
And he desirous to review his Son,
He does dispatch a floting I Will, from hence,
Unto the Hesperian shores, to waft him thence.
Where, what the arts were, used to make him stay,
And how the Sirens wooed him, by the way,
What Monsters he encountered on the coast,
How near our general Joy was to be lost,
Is not our subject now: though all these make
The present gladness greater, for their sake.
But what the triumphs are, the feast, the sport,
And proud solemnities of Neptunes Court,
Now he is safe, and Fame's not heard in vain,
But we behold our happy pledge again.
That with him, loyal HIPPIVS is returned,
Who for it, under so much envy, burned
With his own brightness, till her sterv'd snakes saw
What Neptune did impose, to him was law.

But, why not this, till now?


-- It was not time,
To mix this Music with the vulgars chime.
Stay, till th'abortive, and extemporall dinne
Of balladry, were understood a sin,
Minerva cried: that, what tumultuous verse,
Or prose could make, or steal, they might rehearse,
And every Songster had sung out his fit;
That all the Country, and the Citie-wit,
Of bells, and bonfires, and good cheer was spent,
And Neptunes Guard had drunk all that they meant;
That all the tales and stories now were old
Of the Sea Monster Archy, or grown cold:
The Muses then might venture, undeterr'd,
For they love, then, to sing, when they are heard.

I like it well, it is handsome: and I have
Some thing would fit this. How do you present 'hem?
In a fine Island, say you?

Yes, a Delus:
Such, as when fair Latona fell in travail,
Great Neptune made emergent.

I conceive you.
I would have had your I Will brought floting in, now
In a brave broth, and of a sprightly green,
Just to the color of the Sea; and then,
Some twenty Sirens, singing in the kettel,
With an Arion, mounted on the back
Of a grown Conger, but in such a posture,
As, all the world should take him for a Dolphin:
O, 'twould ha'made such music! Ha'you nothing,
But a bare Island?

Yes, we have a tree too,
Which we do call the Tree of Harmony,
And is the same with what we read, the Sun,
Brought forth in the Indian Musicana first,
And thus it grows. The goodly bole, being got
To certain cubits height, from every side
The boughs decline, which taking root afresh,
Spring up new boles, and those spring new, and newer,
Till the whole tree become a Porticus,
Or arched Arbor, able to receive
A numerous troop, such as our Albion,
And the Companions of his journey are.
And this they sit in.

Your prime Masquers?


Yes.


But where is your Antimasque now, all this while?
I hearken after them.

Faith, we have none.


None?


None, I assure you, neither do I think them
A worthy part of presentation,
Being things so heterogene, to all devise,
Mere By-workes, and at best Outlandish nothings.

O, you are all the heaven awrie! Sir.
For blood of Poetry, running in your veins,
Make not your self so ignorantly simple.
Because Sir, you shall see I am a Poet,
No less then Cook, and that I find you want
A special service here, an Antimasque,
I Will fit you with a dish out of the Kitchen,
Such, as I think, will take the present palates,
A metaphorical dish! And, do but mark,
How a good wit may jumpe with you. Are you ready, Child?
(Had there bin Mask, or no Mask, I had made it.)
Child of the boiling house.

Here, Father.


Bring forth the pot. It is an Olla Podrida,
But I have persons, to present the meats.

Persons!


Such as do relish nothing, but di stato,
(But in another fashion, then you dream of)
Know all things the wrong way, talk of the affairs,
The clouds, the cortines, and the mysteries
That are a foot, and, from what hands they have'hem
(The master of the Elephant, or the Camels)
What correspondences are held; the Posts
That go, and come, and know, almost, their minutes,
All but their business: Therein, they are fishes.
But have their garlic, as the Proverb says,
They are our Quest of enquiry, after news.

Together with their learned Authors?


Yes Sir,
And of the Epicoene gender, He Is, and She Is:
Amphibion Archy is the chief.

Good boy!
The Child is learned too. Note but the Kitchen.
Have you put him, into the pot, for Garlic?

One in his coat, shall stink as strong as he, Sir,
And his friend Giblets with him.

They are two,
That give a part of the seasoning.

I coneeive
The way of your Gally-mawfrey.

You will like it,
When they come pouring out of the pot together.

O, if the pot had been big enough!


What then, Child?


I had put in the Elephant, and one Camel, at least, for Biefe.


But, whom ha'you for Partridge?


A brace of Dwarfes, and delicate plump birds!


And whom for Mutton, and Kid?


A fine laced Mutton,
Or two; and either has her frisking Husband:
That reads her the Corranto, every week.
Grave Mr. Ambler, Newes-master of Poules,
Supplies your Capon; and grown Captain BuZ
(His Emissary) under-writes for Turkey,
A gentleman of the Forest presents Phesant,
And a plump Poultrers wife, in Graces street,
Plays Hen with eggs in the belly, or a Coney,
Choose which you will.

But, where is the Bacon, Thom?


Hogrel the Butcher, and the Sow his wife,
Are both there.

It is well, go, dish'hem out.
Are they well boyld?

Podrida!


What Is that? rotten?


O, that they must be. There Is one maine ingredient
We have forgot, the Artichoke.

No Sir.
I have a Fruicterer, with a cold red nose,
Like a blue fig, performs it.

The fruit looks so.
Good child, go poure'hem out; show their concoction.
They must be rotten boyld, the broth's the best on it,
And that is the Dance. The stage here is the Charger.
And Brother Poet, though the serious part
Be yours, yet, envy not the Cook his art.

Not I. Nam lusus ipse Triumphus amat.


Well, now, expect the Scene it self; it opens!


Look forth, the Shepherd of the Seas,
And of the Ports, that keep'st the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
His ALBION, Prince of all his Isles,
For whom the sea, and land so smiles,
Is home returned well.

And be it thought no common Cause,
That, to it, so much wonder draws,
And all the Heavens consent,
With HARMONY, to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes,
That, for it, up were sent.
It was no envious Stepdames rage;
Or Tyrants malice of the age,
That did employ him forth.
But such a Wisdom, that would prove,
By sending him, their hearts, and love
That else might fear his worth.

I! now the Pomp of Neptunes triumph shines!
And all the glories of his great designs
Are read, reflected, in his sons return!

How all the eyes, the looks, the heart here burn
at his arrival!

These are the true fires.
Are made of joys!

Of longing!


Of desires!


Of hopes!


Of fears!


No intermitted blocks.


But pure affections, and from odorous stocks!


It Is incense all, that flames!
And these materials scarce have names!

My King looks higher, as he scorned the wars
Of winds, and with his trident touched the stars.
There is no wrinkle in his brow, or frown;
But, as his cares he would in Nectar drown,
And all the silver-footed Nymphs were dressed;
To wait upon him, to the Oceans feast.

Or, here in rows upon the banks were set,
And had their several hayres made into net
To catch the youths in, as they come on shore.

How! Galatea sighing! O, no more.
Banish your fears.

And Doris dry your tears.
Albion is come:

And Haliclyon, too,
That kept his side, as he was charged to do,
With wonder.

-- And the Sirens have him not.


Though they no practice, nor no arts forgot,
That might have won him, or by charm, or song.

Or laying forth their tresses all along
Upon the glassie waves;

Then diving:


Then,
Up with their heads, as they were mad of men.

And there, the highest-going billows crown,
Until some lusty Sea-god pulled them down.

See! He is here!


Great Master of the main,
Receive thy dear, and precious pawn again.

SARON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS, bring him thus,
Safe, as thy Subjects wishes gave him us:
And of thy glorious Triumph let it be
No less a part, that thou their loves do see,
Then, that his sacred head's returned to thee.

Spring all the Graces of the age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rhyme:
Add all the softnesses of Courts
The looks, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
That none may say, the Triumph halts.

Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hayle Reverend structure! Boast no more to us
Thy being able, all the Gods to feasts;
We have seen enough: our Albion was thy guest.

Now turn and view the wonders of the deep,
Where Proteus herds, and Neptunes Orkes do keep,
Where all is plough'd, yet still the pasture's green
The ways are found; and yet no paths are seen.

Come noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:

If not to mingle with the men,
What do you here? go home again.

Your dressing do confess,
By what we see, so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.

Why do you wear the Silke-wormes toils;
Or glory in the shellfish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of ore
That you have gathered on the shore,
Whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on
Or any better-water'd stone?

Or Ruby of the rock?


Why do you smell of Amber gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Neice,
The Queen of Love; unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a man?

Try, put your selves unto't.


Your looks, your smiles, and thoughts that meet,
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
do promise you will do it.

It Is time, your eyes should be refreshed at length
With something new, a part of Neptunes strength
See, yond', his fleet, ready to go, or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.

I have another service for you, Brother Poet, a dish of pickled Saylors, fine
salt Sea-boyes, shall relish like Anchoves, or Caveare, to draw down a cup of
Nectar, in the skirts of a night


Come away boys, the Town is ours, hay for Neptune, and our young Master.


He knows the Compass, and the Card,
While Castor sits on the maine yard,
And Pollux too, to help your hayles;
And bright Leucothoe, fills your sails:
Arion sings, the Dolphins swim,
And, all the way, to gaze on him.

Although we wish the Triumph still might last
For such a Prince, and his discovery past,
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles:

And, whilst young Albion does thy labors ^ase,
Dispatch Portunus to thy Ports,

And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Indus laden home with Pearls,
And orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.

And may thy Subjects hearts be all on flame:
Whilst thou do keep the earth in firm estate,
And amongst the winds do suffer no debate.
But both at Sea, and Land, our powers increase
With health, and all the golden gifts of peace.


