WHereas all Representations, especially those of this nature in Court,
public Spectacles, either have been, or ought to be the mirrours of man's
life, whose ends, for the excellence of their exhibiters (as being the
donatives, of great Princes, to their people) ought always to carry a mixture
of profit, with them, no less then delight; We, the Inventors, being
commanded from the King, to think on something worthy of his Majesty's putting
in act, with a selected company of his Lords, and Gentlemen, called to the
assistance. For the honor of his Court, and the dignity of that heroique
love, and regal respect borne by him to his unmatchable Lady, and Spouse, the
Queens Majesty, after some debate of cogitation with our selves, resolved on
this following argument

First, that a Person, boni ominis, of a good Character, as Euphemus, sent
down from Heaven to Callipolis, which is understood, the City of Beauty or
Goodness, should come in; and, finding her Majesty there enthroned, declare
unto her, that Love who was wont to be respected as a special Deity in Court,
and Tutelar God of the place, had of late received an advertisement, that in
the suburbs, or skirts of Callipolis, were crept in certain Sectaries, or
depraved Lovers, who neither knew the name, or nature of love rightly, yet
boasted themselves his followers, when they were fitter to be called his
Furies: their whole life being a continew'd vertigo, or rather a torture on the
wheel of Love, then any motion, either of order or measure. When suddenly they
leap forth below, a Mistress leading them, and with antic gesticulation, and
action, after the manner of the old Pantomimi, they dance over a distracted
Comoedy of Love, expressing their confused affections, in the Scenicall
persons, and habits of the four prime European Nations

A glorious boasting Lover.
A whining Ballading Lover.
An adventurous Romance Lover.
A phantasticke umbrageous Lover.
A bribing corrupt Lover.
A froward jealous Lover.
A sordid illiberall Lover.
A proud scornful Lover.
An angry quarrelling Lover.
A Melancholique despairing Lover.
An envious unquiet Lover.
A sensual brute Lover.
Joy, joy to mortals, the rejoicing fires
Of gladness, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Love presents a world of chaste desires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the mind,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of union with the thing designed,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want.
Plenty the beauty, which it wants, draws;
Want yields it self: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the union's cause.
But, rest not here. For Love has larger scopes,
New joys, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those he can perpetuate.
To you that are by excellence a Queen!
The top of beauty! but, of such an air,
As, only by the minds eye, may be seen
Your enter-woven lines of good, and fair!
Vouchsafe to grace Loves triumph here, to night,
Through all the streets of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendour of your rays made bright
The seat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longs to appear,
But prays of favor, he be not called on,
Till all the suburbs, and the skirts be clear
Of perturbations, and the infection gone.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting Music, that shall not consume
Within the ear, but run the mazes round.

Meanetime, we make lustration of the place,
And with our solemn fires, and waters prove
TO have frighted hence, the weak diseased race
Of those were tortured on the wheel of love.
1 The glorious, 2 whining, 3 the adventurous fool,
4 Phantastique, 5 bribing, and the 6 jealous ass
1 The sordid, 2 scornful, 3 and the angry mule
4 The melancholique, 5 dull, and envious mass,

With all the rest, that in the sensual school
Of lust, for their degree of brute may pass.
All which are vapour'd hence.
No loves, but slaves to sense:
Mere cattle, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our joys again,
Who had the power, and virtue to remove
Such monsters from the labyrinth of love.

It consists of fifteen Lovers, and as many Cupids, who rank themselves
seven, and seven on a side, with each a Cupid before him, with a lighted torch,
and the middle person (which is his Majesty,) placed in the center

Here, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you must pay
First Fruits; and on these altars lay
(The Ladies breast's) your ample vows,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty best allows!

For Love, without his object, soon is gone:
Love must have answering love, to look upon.

To you, best Judge then, of perfection!

The Queen, of what is wonder, in the place!

Pure object, of Heroique Love, alone!

The center of proportion --!

Sweetness.

Grace?

Daigne to receive all lines of love in one.

And by reflecting of them fill this space.

Till it a circle of those glories prove,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Love.

Where Love is mutual, still
All things in order move,

The circle of the will
Is the true sphere of Love.

Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And show your just perfections in your dance.

Which done, Euclia, or a fair Glory appears in the heavens, singing an
applausive song, or Paan of the whole, which she takes occasion to ingeminate
in the second Chorus, upon the sight of a work of Neptunes, being a hollow
rock, filling part of the Sea-prospect, whereon the Muses sit

So love, emergent out of Chaos brought
The world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought
All form to sight!
Loves appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the air,
Those signatures of good, and fair,

Which since have flowed, flowed forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!
And Neptune too,
Shows what his waves can do:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus day,

Which from the Sea flowed forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!

Which ended, the Scene changes to a Garden, and the heavens opening, there
appear four new persons, in form of a Constellation, sitting, or a new
Asterisme, expecting Venus, whom they call upon with this song

Have daughter Venus, have, and come away:

All powers, that govern Marriage, pray
That you will lend your light

Unto the constellation of this night,

Hymen.

And Juno.

And the Genius call,

Your father Jupiter,

And all
That bless, or honor holy nuptial.

VENUS here appears in a cloud, and passing through the Constellation,
descends to the earth, when presently the cloud vanishes, and she is seen
sitting in a throne

Here, here I present ame
Both in my girdle, and my flame.
Wherein are woven all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Hours
(My nources once) with all the arts
Of gayning, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I go to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauties sake!

Her song ended, and she rising to go up to the Queen, the Throne
disappeares: in place of which, there shoots up a Palm tree with an
imperial (rowne on the top, from the root whereof, Lillies and Roses, twining
together, and embracing the stem, flourish through the crown, which she in
the song, with the Chorus describes

Beauty and Love, whose story is mysteriall,
In yonder Palm Tree, and the Crown imperial,
Do from the Rose, and Lilly so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdoms. But to Britains Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then these, who so united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queen would well historifie,
Need only speak their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES with his MARY, named are
And all the rest of Loves, or Princes famed are.

