COssin, I know what belongs to this place sym what petter then you; and
therefore give me leave to be pold to advise you. 'Is not a small matter to
offer your self into presence of a king, and aull his Court? Be not too byssie
and forward, till you be caulld, I tauke reason to you


Cym, never tauke any taukes: if the King of gread Prittaine keep it Assizes
here, I will cym into Court: Loog you, do you see now, and please Got


Taw, d in ynbhyd, y, dhwyti-n abl i anabhy, pob peth oath folineb, agy tyny
gwatwar ar die wlac.


Gad vynl Lonyth. I say I will appear in Court.


Appear as you s'ud do then, Dab Jenkin in good sort; do not discredit the
nation, and pyt wrong upon us aull by your rassnes


What do you caull rassnesse Evan y Gynrn, is not aull the Cyntrie, and aull
Welse, and the Prince of Wales too abused in him? by this hand, I will tell it
the Kings own ears every 'oord, do you see him now? Bless your ursip, pray
God is in Heaven bless ever ince of your ursip; and Wales is comend it to your
ursip, from top to toe, with aull his hearts aull over, by got'utch me, and
would be glad as a silling to see you in him. Come it down once a day and
try; I tell you now, you s'all be as welcomely there, as where you were in
your own Cyntries last two Symmers, and pershance we will made you as good
s'eere too; we will promise your ursip as good a piece of Seeze, as you need pit
in your head, and pleas'yow s'all be toasted too. Go too, see him once upon a
time your own sellive, is more good mean you, then is aware of: By got' is
very hard, but s'all make you a Shestice of Peace the first days you come; and
pershance (say nothing) Knight of the S'ire too: 'Is not Worsters, nor
Pembrokes, nor Mongymeries s'all carry him from you. But aull this while s'all
I tell you a liddell now? 'is a great huge deal of anger upon you, from aull
Wales and the Nation; that your ursippe would suffer our young Master Sarles
your 'ursips Son and Heir, and Prince of Wales, the first time he ever play
Dance, to be pit up in a Mountain (got knows where) by a palterly Poet, how
do you say him Evan


Libia.


Vellhy! Libia. And how do you caull him the Mountain; his name is


Adlas.


Hynno, hynno. Adlas? I please your ursip is a Welsse Attorney, and a preddilie
scholars, a wear him his long coat, line with Seepes skin, as you see every
days of the week. A very sufficient litigious fellow's in the Terms, and a
finely Poets out of the Terms, he has a sprig of Laurel already toward his
girlonds. He was get in here at Twelfe-night and see aull; what do you call
it, your matters, and says is naught, naught, stark naught


I do say'and't please his Madestee, I do not like him with aull his heart;
h'is plugd in by the ears, without all piddies, or mercies of propriedies or
decorums. I will do injuries to no man before his Madestee; but 'is a very
vile and absurd as a man would wisse, that I do say, to pyt the Prince of
Wales in an outlandis Mountain; when he is known, his Highness has as
goodly Mountains and as tawll a Hills of his own (look you, do you see now)
and of as good standing, and as good descent, as the prowdest Adlas christened


I good Evan, I pray you reckon his Madestee some of the Welse Hills, the
Mountains


Why there is Talgar.


Well said.


Eliennieth.


Well said Evan.


Cadier Arthur.


Toudge him, toudge him.


Pen-maen-maur.


Is good boys, Evan.


And Craig-eriri.


Aw? vellhy? why law you now? 'Is not Pen-maen-maur, and Craig-Eriri as good
sound, as Adlas every whit of him


'Is caulld the British Aulpes, Craig-Eririri, a very sufficient Hills.


By got we will play with him Hills for Hills, for sixteen and forty s'illings
when he dares


I pray you let it alone your wachers a liddle while Cossin Davy ap Jenkin, and
give it leave I may give his Madestee, and the Court informations toudging now
the Reformations


Why? cannot you and I tauke too Cossin? the Haull (God bless it) is big
enough to hold both our taukes, and we were twice as much as we are


Why, tauke it aull then, if you think is reason in you.


No; I know is no reason, Evan, I confess him; but every man would show himselve
a good subject as he can to his means; I am a subject by my place, and two
heads is better then one I imagine under correction


Got's ownes, here is no corrections man; imagine what you please, do in got's
name, imagine, imagine, why do you not imagine? here is no pennyrths of
corrections


Aw dgwin Tawson.


'Is so invincibles, so in mercifullys ignorant, a man knows not upon what
inces of ground to stand to him; does conceive it no more as I am a true Welse
christian, then (sirreverence 'o the cympany) the-hilts of his dagger


Go too, I will make the hilts conceive a knock upon your pate, and pershance
a bumpe to if you tauke


How! upon my pate?


Yes upon your pate; your Poetlie pate, and your Law pate too.


Tawson, Tawson. Fore'got you will go nere to hazard a thumb, and a four
finger of your best hand; if you knock him here, you may knock him better
s'eape at Ludlow a great deal: do you know the place where it is


Well, I can be patient, I trust, I trust it is in a presence I presume that
loves no quarrels, nor replies, nor the lies, nor the shallenge, nor the
Duells: but -- I will do my byssinesse now, and make this a byssinesse for
another days hereafter: Pleas' your Madestee -- By got I am out of my tempers
terribly well, got forgive me, and pyt me in my selive again. How does your
Highness -- I know not a 'oord or a syllable what I say; 'is do me that
vexations


O Evan; for the honor of Wales.


I remember him now, 'is enough, blessings upon me 'is out of my head again;
lost, quite lost: this knock, of my pate has knock aull my wits out of my
brains I think, and turn my reasons out of doors. Believe it I will rub,
and break your s'ins for this, I will not come so high as your head, but I
will take your nose in my way, very sufficiently


Hang your sufficiency.


It Is well, very well; it is better, better, exceedingly well.


What? -- you mean (hough) to make us so long tarry here, ha?


Marry, here is aull undone with distempers me thinks, and angers, and
passions


Who is angry?


Why it is I is angry, and hungry too, if you mark me; I could eat his
Flint-seere face now, offer to knock my pate in the hearing of aull these, and
more too? well, before his Madestee I do yet forgive him now with aull my
heart, and will be revenged another time


Why that is good Evan, honest brave Evan.


Have you told the Kings Madestee of the alterations.


I am now once again about him: peace; please your Madestee, the Welse Nation
hearing that the Prince of Wales was to come into the Hills again, before your
Madestee have a desire of his Highness for the honor of Wales, to make him a
Welse hills, which is done without any manner of sharshese to your Madestee,
only shanging his name: He is caull now Craig-Eriri, a Mountain in
Carnarvan-Seere; has as gray beard, and as much snow upon his head aull the
year long


As Adlas for his gutts.


He tells your Madestee true, for aull he is a liddle out of season: but cym
every man tell as much as he cannow, my quality is I hope sufficiently known
to his Madestee, that I am Rector Chori is aull my ambitions, and that I would
have it aull Welse; that is the s'ort and the long of the Requests. The Prince
of Wales we know is aull over Welse


And then my Lord Marquise.


Both my Lord Marquise is as good, noble, true Briton, as any ever is come out
of Wales


My Lord Mongymerie is as sound Welse too, as flese and blood can make him.


And the Howard's by got, is Welse as strait as any arrow.


Houghton is a Town bear his name there by Pipidiauke.


And Erwin, his name is Wyn; but the Duts-men come here in Wales, and caull him
Heer-win


Then Car is plain Welse, Caerlton, Caermardin, Cardiffe.


And Palmer, his Ancestors was call him Pen-maure.


And Acmooty, is Ap mouth-wye of Llanmouthwye.


And Abercromy, is aull one as Abermarlys.


Or Abertau.


Or Aberdugled haw.


Or Abes hodney.


Or Abergevenny.


Or Aber conway.


Aberconway is very like Abercromy, a liddell hard s'ifte has pit'em aull into
Wales; but our desires and petitions is, that the muisiques be aull Welse, and
the dances, and no' Erculus brought in now with a gread staff, and a pudding
upon him


Aw; was his distaffe, was not his club.


What need of Ercules, when Cadwallader --


Or Lluellin, or Reese ap Griphin, or Cradock, or Owen Glendower, with a Welse
hook, and a Goats skin on his back, had done very better, and twice as well


Nay, and to pyt apparel on a pottell of hay, and caull him Lantaeus.


The Bellie-gods too, was as proper a monster as the best of'hem.


I, stand to it, there was neither Poetries, nor Architectures, nor designs in
that bellie-god; nor a note of musicks about him. Come, bring forth our
musickes, you s'all hear the true Pritan strains now, the ancient Welse Harp
-- you tauke of their Pigmees too, here is a Pigmees of Wales now; set forth
another Pigmees by him


WOE. Aw Diesus! what a bravely company is here? This's a finely Haull indeed!


What a deal of fine candle it is?


I, peace; let his Madestee hear the Music.


Blemae yr Brenin.


Docko ve.


Diesus blesse'him; Saint Davy blesse'him. I bring my boy of my back ten mile
here to loog upon him: Loog Hullin, loog Hullin, spewch humma ven nayd Dumma
braveris: you s'all hear him play too


Peace, no more pradling; begin set him down.


I'Is not come here to tauke of Brut,
from whence the Welse does take his root;
Nor tell long pedigree of Prince Camber,
whose lineage would fill aull this Chamber;
Nor sing the deeds of old Saint Davy,
the ursip of which would fill a Navy.
But hark you me now, for a liddell tales
s'all make a gread deal to the credit of Wales;

In which we will toudg your ears,
with the praise of her thirteen S'eeres;
And make you as glad, and merry
as fourteen pot of Perrie.
Still, still we will toudg your ears with the praise, etc.

It Is true, was wear him Sherkin freize,
but what is that? we have store of s'eize,
And Got his plenty of Goats milk
that sell him well, will buy him silk
Enough to make him fine to quarrel
At Hereford-sizes in new apparel;
And get him as much green Melmet perhap,
s'all give it a face to his Monmouth cap.
But then the ore of Lemster,
By got is never a Sempster;
That when he is spun, ore did,
Yet match him with her third
Still, still, etc.

AVll this's the backs now, let us tell ye,
of some provisions for the belly:
As Cid, and Goat, and great Goats mother,
and Runt, and Cow, and good Cowes Other.
And once but taste of the Welse-mutton,
your Englis-s'eep's not worth a button.
And then for your Fiss, s'all shoose it your diss.
look but about, and there is a Trout.
A Salmon, Cor, or Chevin,
Will feed you six, or seven,
As taull man as ever swagger,
With Welse-hooke, or long dagger.
Still, still, etc.

But aull this while was never think
a word in praise of our Welse drink,
Yet for aull that, is a cup of Bragat,
all England S'eere, may cast his Cab-at.
And what you say to Ale of Webley,
toudge him as well, you will praise him trebly,
As well as Metheglin, or Sidar, or Mead,
S'all S'ake it your dagger quite out of the seath.
And Oat-cake of Guarthenion,
With a goodly Leeke, or Onion,
To give as sweet a Rellis
As ere did Harper, Ellis.
Still, still, etc.

ANd yet, is nothing now aull this,
if of our Musiques we do miss;
Both Harpes, and Pipes too; and the Crowd,
must aull come in and tauke alowd,
As loud as Bangu, Davies bell,
of which is no doubt you have here tell,
As well as our louder Wrexham, Organ,
and rumbling Rocks in S'eere Glamorgan;
Where look but in the ground there,
And you s'all see a sound there,
That put him aull togedder,
Is sweet as measure pedder.
Still, still, etc.

AV, but what say you should it shance too,
that we should leap it in a Dance too,
And make it you as great a pleasure,
if but your eyes be now at leisure;
As in your ears s'all leave a laughter,
to last upon you six days after?
Ha! wella-goe too, let us try to do
as your old Britton, things to be writ on.
Come put on other looks now,
And lay away your hooks too;
And though yet you have no pump sirs,
Let'hem hear that you can jump sirs.
Still, still, etc.

Speak it your conscience now; did your Ursip ever see such a song in your
days; 'is not as finely a tunes as a man would wisse to put in his ears


Come, his Madestee s'all hear better to your Dance.


Haw, well danced, very well danced.


Well played Howell, well played Rheese: Dawharry vellhee; well danced in faith.


Good boys, good boys; pold, and Prittan, pold, and Prittan.


Is not better this now then Pigmies? this is men, this is no monsters, and you
mark him: Well caull forth you Goats now, your Ursip s'all see a properly
natural devise come from the Welse Mountains; Is no Tuns, nor no Bottils:
Stand by there, s'ow his' Ursip the Hills, was dronkenry in his eyes that make
that devise in my mind. But now, marg, marg your Ursip I pray you now, and you
s'all see natures and propriedies; the very beasts of Wales s'all do more then
your men pyt in bottills, and barrills, there was a tale of a tub in faith. 'Is
the Goat-heard and his dog, and his son, and his wife make musiques to the
Goats as they come from the Hills; give 'hem rooms, give 'hem rooms, now the
cym: The elderly Goats is indifferently grave at first, because of his beard,
and only tread it the measures; byt you will see him pyt off his gravities by
and by well enough, and friske it as fine as ere a Kid on'hem aull. The Welse
Goat is an excellent dancer by birth, that is written of him, and of as wisely
carriage, and comely behaviors a beast (for his footing especially) as some
one or two man, God bless him


A Haull, a haull; come a haull, Au vellhee.


Nay, and your Madestee bid the Welse Goats welcome; The Welse Wen-ces s'all
sing your praises, and dance your healths too


AW, God bless it our good King S'ames,
His Wife, and his S ildren, and aull his Reames,

And aull his 'ursipfull S'istice of peace about him,

And send that his Court be never without him.

Ow, that her would come down into Wales,

Her s'ud be very welcome to Welse Ales.

I have a Cow,

And I have a hen;

S'all give it milk,

And eggs for aull his men.

'It self s'all have venison, and other Seere,
And may it be sterved, that steal him his Dear,
there, there, and every where.

Cym dance now, let us hear your dance, dance.


Ha! well played Ales.


For the Honor of Wales.


DIggon. Enough, enough, Diggon, well now aull the absurdities is removed and
cleared; the rest and'please your Grace s'all tarry still, and go on as it
was; Virtue, and Pleasure was well enough, indifferently well enough: Only we
will entreat Pleasure to cym out of Driffimdore, that is the Gilden Valley, or
Gelthleedore, that is the Golden Grove, and is in Care Marden the Welse Garden.
'Is a thousand place in Wales as finely places as the Esperides every crum of
him: Merlin was borne there too, put we would not make him rise now and wake
him, because we have his Prophecies already of your Madestee's name to as good
purpose, as if he were here in presence, Pod hy geller Evan


You will still pyt your selve to these plunses, you mean his Madestees
Anagrams of Charles James Stuart


I that is Claims Arthurs Seat, which is as much as to say, your Madestee
s'ud be the first King of gread Prittan, and sit in Cadier Arthur, which is
Arthurs Chair, as by Gods blessing you do: And then your Son Master
S'harles his, how do you caull him? is Charles Stuart, calls true hearts, that
is us, he calls us, the Welse Nation to be ever at your service, and love you,
and honor you, which we pray you understand it his meaning. And that the
Musicians yonder, are so many Brittis bards that sing o'pen the Hills to let
out the Prince of Wales, and his Welse friends to you, and all is done


Very homely done it is I am well assured, if not very rudely: But it is hoped
your Madestee will not interpret the honor, merits, love, and affection of so
noble a portion of your people, by the poverty of these who have so
imperfectly uttered it: You will rather for their saks, who are to come in the
name of Wales, my Lord the Prince, and the others; pardon what is past, and
remember the Cyntrie has always been fruitful of loyal hearts to your
Majesty; a very garden and seed plot of honest minds and men: What lights of
learning has Wales sent forth for your Schools? What industrious Studients of
your Laws? what able Ministers of your Justice? whence has the Crown in all
times better servitors, more liberal of their lives and fortunes? where has
your Court or Council (for the present) more noble ornaments or better aids?
I am glad to see it, and to speak it, and though the Nation be said to be
unconquered,, and most loving liberty, yet it was never mutinous (and please
your Majesty;) but stout, valiant, courteous, hospitable, temperate,
ingenious, capable of all good Arts, most lovingly constant, charitable, great
Antiquaries, Religious preservers of their Gentry, and Genealogy, as they are
zealous and knowing in Religion

In a word, It is a Nation bettered by prosperity so far, as to the present
happiness it enjoyes under your most sacred Majesty, it wishes nothing to be
added, but to see it perpetual in You, and your Issue



