A Masque PRESENTED IN THE HOUSE OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD HAY.

BY DIVERSE OF NOBLE QVALITY, HIS FRIENDS.

FOR THE ENTERTAINment of Monsieur LE BARON DE TOVR, extraordinary Ambassador
for the FRENCH KING

On Saturday the 22. of FEBRVARY, 1617.

Quid titulum poscis? Versus duo tresve legantur.

1617.

CHEEREFVLNES, in a loose flowing garment, filling out wine from an antique
piece of plate; with this word Adsit laetitiae dator

READINESS, a winged Maid, with two flaming bright lights in her hands; and her
word. Amor addidit alas

NAy, faint not now, so near the fields of rest.
Here no more furies, no more torments dwell,
Then each has felt already in his breast;
Who has been once in love, has proved his Hell.
Up then, and follow this my golden rod,
That points you next to aged LETHES shore,
Who poures his waters from his urne abroad,
Of which but tasting, you shall faint no more.

Stay, who, or what phantastique shades are these
That HERMES leads?

They are the gentle forms,
Of Lovers, tossed upon those frantique seas,
Whence VENUS sprung.

And have rid out her storms?

No.

Did they perish?

Yes.

How?

Drowned by love,
That drew them forth with hopes as smooth as were
Th'unfaithfull waters he desired them prove.

And turned a tempest, when he had them there?

He did, and on the billow would he roll,
And laugh to see one throw his heart away,
Another sighing, vapor forth his soul,
A third, to melt himself in tears, and say,
O Love, I now to salter water turn
Then that I die in; then, a fourth, to cry
Amid the surges; oh! I burn, I burn:
A fifth, laugh out, it is my ghost, not I.
And thus in paires I found'hem. Only one
There is, that walks, and stops, and shakes his head,
And shuns the rest, as glad to be alone,
And whispers to himself, he is not dead.

No more are all the rest.

No:

No.

But, why
Proceeds this doubtful voice from destiny?

It is too sure.

Sure?

I. Thinks MERCVRY,
That any things, or names on earth do die,
That are obscured from knowledge of the FATES,
Who keep all rolls?

And know all natures dates?

They say themselves, they are dead.

It not appears.
Or, by our rock.

Our spindle.

Or our sheeres.

Here all their threads are growing, yet none cut.

I'gin to doubt, that Love with charms has put
This phant'sie in'hem; and they only think
That they are ghosts.

If so, then let'hem drink
Of LETHES stream.

'Twill make'hem to forget
LOVES name.

And so, they may recover yet!

Do, bow unto the reverend lake:
And having touched there; up, and shake
The shadows off, which yet do make
Us you, and you your-selves mistake.

See! see! they are themselves again!

Yes, now the'are substances, and men.

LOVE, at the name of LETHE flies.

For, in oblivion drowned, he dies.

He must not hope, though other states
He often subdue, he can the FATES.

'Twere insolence, to think his powers
Can work on us; or equal ours.

Return, Return,
Like lights to burn
On earth,
For others good:
Your second birth
Will fame old LETHES flood,
And warn a world,
That now are hoorld
About in tempest, how they prove
Shadows for Love.
Leap forth: your light it is the nobler made,
By being struck out of a shade.

WHy, now you take me! these are rites
That grace Loves days, and crown his nights!
These are the motions, I would see,
And praise, in them that follow me!
Not sighs, nor tears, nor wounded hearts,
Nor flames, nor ghosts: but ayrie parts
Tried, and refined as yours have bin,
And such they are, I glory in

Look, look unto this snakie rod,
And stop your ears, against the charming god;
His every word, falls from him, is a snare:
Who have so lately known him, should beware.

Come, do not call it CVPIDS crime,
You were thought dead before your time.
If thus you move to HERMES will
Alone; you will be thought so still.
Go, take the Ladies forth, and talk,
And touch, and taste too: Ghosts can walk.
'Twixt eyes, tongues, hands, the mutual strife
Is bred, that tries the truth of life.
They do, indeed, like dead men move,
That think they live, and not in love!

Nay, you should never have left off:
But stayed, and heard your CUPID scoff,
To find you in the line you were.

Your too much wit, breeds too much fear.

Good Fly, good night.

But will you go?
Can you leave LOVE, and he entreat you so?
Here, take my quiver, and my bow,
My torches too; that you, by all, may know
I mean no danger to your stay:
This night, I will create my holiday,
And be yours naked, and entire.

As if that LOVE, dis-arm'd, were less a fire?
Away, away.

Yet lest that VENUS wanton Son,
Should with the world, be quite undone,
For your fair sakes (you brighter stars,
Who have beheld these civil wars.)
FATE is content, these Lovers here
Remain still such: so LOVE will swear
Never to force them act to do,
But what he will call HERMES too.

I swear: and with like cause thank MERCVRY,
As these have, to thank him, and destiny.

All then take cause of joy: for who has not?
Old LETHE, that their follies are forgot;
We, that their lives unto their fates they fit:
They, that they still shall love, and love with wit.


