WHo had his top ending in the figure of an old man, his head and beard all
hoary, and frost, as if his shoulders were covered with snow; the rest Wood,
and Rock. A Grove of Ivy at his feet; out of which, to a wild Music of
Cymbals, Flutes, and Tabers is brought forth, COMVS the God of Cheer, or the
Belly, riding in Triumph, his head crowned with Roses, and other flowers, his
hair curled: They that wait upon him crowned with Ivy, their Javelins done
about with it; one of them going with Hercules his Boule bare before him, while
the rest presented him with this Hymn

Room, room, make room for the bouncing belly,
First father of sauce, and deviser of jellie;
Prime master of Arts, and the giver of wit,
That found out the excellent Engine, the spit;
The plough, and the flaile, the mill, and the hopper,
The hutch, and the boulter, the furnace and copper,
The oven, the baven, the mawkin, the peele,
The harth, and the range, the dog, and the wheel,
He, he first invented the hogshead and tun,
The gimlet and vice too, and taught 'em to run,
And since with the funnell, and Hippocras bag,
H'as made of himself, that now he cries swag;
Which shows though the pleasure be but of four inches,
Yet he is a Weesell, the gullet that pinches
Of any delight, and not spares from this back,
What ever to make of the belly a sack!
Hail, hail plump paunch, o the founder of taste,
For fresh-meats, or powlder'd, or pickle, or paste,
Devourer of broyl'd, backed, roasted, or sod;
And emptier of cups, be they even or odd;
All which have now made thee so wide in the waste,
As scarce with no pudding thou art to be laced,
But eating and drinking until thou do nod,
Thou break'st all thy girdles, and breakst forth a god.
DO you hear my friends? to whom did you sing all this now? pardon me only
that I ask you, for I do not look for an answer; He answer my self, I know
it is now such a time as the Saturnalls for all the World, that every man
stands under the eaves of his own hat, and sings what please him; that is the
right, and the liberty of it. Now you sing of god Comus here the bellie-god; I
say it is well, and I say it is not well: It is well as it is a ballad, and the
belly worthy of it; I must needs say, and 'twere forty yards of ballad more,
as much ballad as tripe. But when the belly is not edyfied by it, it is not
well; for where did you ever read or hear, that the belly had any ears? Come
never pumpe for an answer, for you are defeated; Our fellow Hunger there that
was as ancient a reteiner to the belly as any of us, was turned away for being
unseasonable, not unreasonable, but unseasonable; and now is he poor thin-gut,
feign to get his living with teaching of Starlings, Mag-pies, Parrots, and
Jacke-dawes, those things he would have taught the belly. Beware of dealing
with the belly, the belly will not be talked too, especially when he is
full; then there is no venturing upon Venture, he will blow you all up, he will
thunder indeed-la: Some in dirision call him the father of farts; but I say he
was the first inventor of great Ordnance, and taught us to discharge them on
Festival days, would we had a fit feast for him in faith, to show his
activity; I would have something now fetched in to please his five senses, the
throat, or the two senses the eyes: Pardon me for my two senses, for I that
carry Hercules Boule in the service, may see double by my place; for I have
drunk like a frog to day: I would have a Tun now brought in to dance, and so
many bottles about him. Ha! you look as if you would make a problem of this;
do you see? do you see? a problem: why bottles? and why a tun? and why a tun?
and why bottles to dance? I say that men that drink hard, and serve the belly
in any place of quality (as the joviall Tinkers, or the lusty kindred) are
living measures of drink, and can transform themselves, and do every day to
bottles, or tuns when they please: And when they have done all they can, they
are as I say again, (for I think I said somewhat like it before) but moving
measures of drink, and there is a piece in the Cellar can hold more than all
they. This will I make good, if it please our new god but to give a nod, for
the belly does all by signs; and I am all for the belly, the truest clock
in the world to go by

What Rites are these? breeds earth more monsters yet?
Antaeus scarce is cold: what can beget
This store? (and stay) such contraries upon her,
Is earth so fruitful of her own dishonor?
Or'cause his vice was inhumanitie,
Hopes she by vicious hospitality
To work an expiation first? and then
(Help virtue) these are sponges, and not men:
Bottles? mere vessels? half a tun of paunch?
How? and the other half thrust forth in haunch?
Whose feast? the bellies? Comus? and my cup
Brought in to fill the drunken Orgies up?
And here abused? that was the crowned reward,
Of thirsty Heroes, after labor hard?
Burdens, and shames of nature, perish, die;
(For yet you never lived) but in the stie
Of vice have wallow'd, and in that swines strife
Been buried under the offense of life:
Go reele and fall under the load you make,
Till your swollen bowels burst with what you take.
Can this be pleasure, to extinguish man?
Or so quite change him in his figure? can
The belly love his pain? and be content
With no delight but what is a punishment?
These monsters plague themselves, and fitly too,
For they do suffer; what, and all the do,
But here must be no shelter, nor no shroud
For such: Sincke Grove, or vanish into cloud.
GReat friend and servant of the good,
Let cool a while thy heated blood,
And from thy mighty labor cease.
Lie down, lie down,
And give thy troubled spirits peace,
Whilst virtue, for whose sake
Thou do this god-like travail take,
May of the choysest herbage make
(Here on this Mountain bred,)
A crown, a crown
For thy immortal head.

ANtaeus dead! and Hercules yet live!
Where is this Hercules? what would I give
To meet him now? meet him? nay, three such other,
If they had hand in murder of our brother?
With three? with four? with ten? nay with as many
As the name yields? pray anger there be any
Whereon to feed my just revenge, and soon:
How shall I kill him? hurl him against the Moon,
And break him in small portions? give to Greece
His brain? and every tract of earth a piece.
2 PIG. He is yonder.
1 Where?
3 At the hill foot, asleep.
1 Let one go steal his club.
2 My charge, I Will creep.
4 He Is ours.
1 Yes, peace.
3 Triumph, we have him boy.
4 Sure, sure, he is sure.
1 Come, let us dance for joy.

Wake Hercules, awake; but heave up thy black eye,
It Is only asked from thee to look, and these will die,
Or fly:
Already they are fled,
Whom scorn had else left dead.
REst still thou active friend of virtue; These
Should not disturb the peace of Hercules.
Earths worms, and Honors dwarfes (at too great ods)
Prove, or provoke the issue of the gods.
See, here a Crown the aged Hill has sent thee,
My Grand-sire Atlas, he that did present thee
With the best sheep that in his fold were found,
Or golden fruit in the Hesperian ground,
For rescuing his fair Daughters, then the prey
Of a rude Pirate as thou came this way;
And taught thee all the learning of the Sphere,
And how like him thou might the heavens up-beare;
As that thy labors virtuous recompense
He, though a Mountain now, has yet the sense
Of thanking thee for more, thou being still
Constant to goodness, guardian of the hill;
Antaeus by thee suffocated here,
And the voluptuous Comus god of cheer
Beat from his Grove, and that defaced, but now
The time's arrived that Atlas told thee of, how
B'unalterd law, and working of the Stars,
There should be a cessation of all jars,
Twixt Virtue and her noted opposite
Pleasure; that both should meet here in the sight
Of Hesperus, the glory of the West,
The brightest star that from his burning crest
Lights all on this side the Atlanticke-Seas,
As far as to thy Pillars, Hercules,
See where he shines, Justice, and Wisdom placed
about his throne, and those with honor graced
Beauty, and Love: It is not with his Brother
Bearing the world, but ruling such another
Is his renown, Pleasure, for his delight
Is reconciled to Virtue, and this night
Virtue brings forth, twelve Princes have been bred
In this rough mountain, and near Atlas head
The hill of knowledge; one, and chief of whom
Of the bright race of Hesperus is come,
Who shall in time, the same that he is be,
And now is only a less light then he;
These now she trusts with Pleasure, and to these
She gives an entrance to the Hesperides
Fair beauties garden; neither can she fear
They should grow soft, or wax effeminate here;
Since in her sight, and by her charge all is done,
Pleasure the servant, Virtue looking on.

OPEN aged Atlas, open then thy lap,
And from thy beamy bosom strike a light,
That men may read in the mysterious map
All lines
And signs
Of royal education, and the right,
See how they come and show,
That are but borne to know.
Descend
Descend
Though pleasure lead,
Fear not to follow:
They who are bred
Within the Hill
Of skill,
May safely tread
What path they will,
No ground of good is hollow.
BUT Hermes stay, a little let me pause,
Who Is this that leads?

A guide that gives them laws
To all their motions, Dedalus the wise;

And does in sacred harmony comprise
His precepts?

Yes.

they may securely prove
Then any laborinth, though it be of love.

COme on, come on; and where you go,
so interweave the curious knot,
As even th'observer scarce may know
which lines are Pleasures, and which not:
First figure out the doubtful way,
at which a while all youth should stay,
Where she and Virtue did contend,
which should have Hercules to friend.
Then as all actions of mankind,
are but a laborinth, or maze:
So let your Dances be entwined,
yet not perplex men unto gaze;
But measured, and so numerous too,
as men may read each act they do;
And when they see the graces meet,
admire the wisdom of your feet:
For dancing is an exercise,
not only shows the movers wit,
But makes the beholders wise,
as he has power to rise to it.
O More, and more, this was so well,
As praise wants half his voice to tell,
again your selves compose,
And now put all the aptness on,
Of figure, that proportion,
or color can disclose.
That if those silent Arts were lost,
Design, and picture, they might boast,
from you a newer ground,
Instructed by the heightning sense
Of dignity and reverence,
in their true motions found.
Begin, begin; for look, the fair
Do longing, listen to what air
you form your second touch;
That they may vent their murmuring hymns,
Just to the -- you move your limbs,
and wish their own were such.
Make haste, make have, for this
The laborinth of beauty is.
IT follows now you are to prove
The subt'lest maze of all, that is Love,
and if you stay too long,
The fair will think you do'em wrong:
Go choose among -- But with a mind
as gentle as the stroaking wind
runs ore the gentler flowers.
And so let all your actions smile,
As if they meant not to beguile,
the Ladies but the hours.
Grace, laughter, and discourse may meet,
and yet the beauty not go less:
For what is noble should be sweet,
But not dissolved in wantonness.
Will you that I give the law
to all your sport and some-it,
It should be such should envy draw,
but -- overcome it.
AN eye of looking back were well,
Or any murmr that would tell
Your thoughts, how you were sent,
and went
To walk with Pleasure, not to dwell.
These, these are hours by virtue spared
Her self, she being her own reward:
But she will have you know,
that though
Her sports be soft, her life is hard:
You must return unto the Hill
and their advance
With labor, and inhabit still
that height and Crown,
From whence you ever may look down
upon triumphed chance.
She, she it is in darkness shines,
It Is she that still her self refines,
by her own light to every eye:
More seen, more known when vice stands by.
And though a stranger here on earth,
In Heaven she has her right of birth:
There, there is Virtues seat,
Strive to keep her your own,
It Is only she can make you great,
Though place here make you known.

