IF Love be called a lifting of the Sense
To knowledge of that pure intelligence,
Wherein the Soul has rest, and residence:
When were the Senses in such order placed?

The Sight, the Hearing, Smelling, Touching, Taste,
All at one Banquet?

'Would it ever last!

We wish the same: who set it forth thus?

Love!

But to what end, or to what object?

Love!

Does Love then feast it self?

Love will feast Love!

You make of Love, a riddle, or a chain,
A circle, a mere knott, untie't again.

Love is a Circle, both the first, and last
Of all our Actions, and his knotts, too, fast.

A true-love Knot, will hardly be unti'd,
And if it could, who would this Pair divide.

God made them such, and Love.

Who is aring,
The likest to the year of anything,

And runs into it self.

Then let us sing,
And run into one sound.
Let Welcome fill

Through all our Language, Welcome, Welcome still,

Could we put on the beauty of all Creatures,

Sing in the Air, and notes of Nightingales,

Exhale the sweets of Earth, and all her features,

And tell you, softer then in Silk, these tales,

Welcome should season all for Taste.
And hence,
Sense,
Welcome, true Welcome fill the Complements.

COme forth, boldly put forth, in your Holy Day Clothes, every Mothers Son of
you. This is the King, and Queens, Majesticall Holy Day. My Lord has it
granted from them; I had it granted from my Lord: and do give it unto you
gratis, that is bona fide, with the faith of a Surveyour, your Coronell
Vitruvius. Do you know what a Surveyour is now? I tell you a Supervisor! A
hard word, that; but it may be softened, and brought in, to signify something.
An Overseer! One that oversee-eth you. A busy man! And yet I must seem busier
then I am, (as the Poet sings, but which of them. I will not now trouble my
self to tell you.) O Captain Smith! Vulcan! with your three Sledges, you are
our Music, you come a little too tardie; but we remit that, to your
polt-foot, we know you are lame. Plant your selves there, and beat your time
out at the Anvile. Time, and Measure, are the Father, and Mother of Music,
you know, Vitruvius knows a little. O Chesil! our curious Carver! and Master
Maul, our Free-Mason; Squire Summer, our Carpenter, and Twybil his Man; stand
you four, there, in the second rank, work upon that ground. And you Dresser,
the Plomber; Quarrel, the Glasier; Fret, the Plaisterer; and Beater, the
Morterman; put all you on in the reere, as finishers in true footing, with
Tune, and Measure. Measure is the Soul of a Dance, and Tune the Tickle-foot
thereof. Use Holy Day legs, and have 'hem: Spring, Leap, Caper, and Gingle;
Pumpes, and Ribbands, shall be your reward, till the Soles of your feet swell,
with the surfeit of your light and nimble Motion

Well done, my Musical, Arithmeticall, Iniquo Vitruvius. Hay for the Lilly,
for, and the blended Rose


And the King, and Queen, having a second Banquet, set down before them from
the Clouds by two Loves; One, as the Kings, the other as the Queens;
differenced by their Garlands only: His of White, and Red Roses; the other of
Lilly's inter-weav'd, Gold, Silver, Purple, etc. With a bough of Palm (in his
hand) cleft a little at the top. They were both armed, and winged: with Bows
and Quivers, Cassocks, Breeches, Buskins, Gloves, and Perukes alike. They stood
silent awhile, wondering at one another, till at last the lesser of them began
to speak

ANother Cupid?

Yes, your second self,
A Son of Venus, and as mere an elfe,
And wagge as you.

Eros?


No, Anteros:

Your Brother, Cupid, yet not sent to cross',
Or spy into your favors, here, at Court.

What then?

To serve you, Brother, and report
Your graces from the Queens side to the Kings,
In whose name I salute you.

Break my wings
I fear you will.

O be not jealous, Brother!
What bough is this?

A Palm.


Give me't.

Another
You may have.

I will this.


Divide it.


So.

This was right Brother-like! The world will know
By this one Act, both natures. You are Love,
I Love, again. In these two Spheres we move,
Eros, and Anteros.

We have cleft the bough,
And struck a tallie of our loves, too, now.

I call to mind the wisdom of our Mother
Venus, who would have Cupid have a Brother --

To look upon, and thrive. Me seems I grew
Three inches higher sin' I met with you.
It was the Counsel, that the Oracle gave
Your Nurses the glad Graces, sent to crave
Themis advice. You do not know (quoth she)
The nature of this Infant. Love may be
Brought forth thus little, live awhile alone,
But never will prosper, if he have not one
Sent after him to play with.

Such another
As you are Anteros, our loving brother.

Who would be always, planted, in your eye;
For Love, by Love increases mutually.

We, either, looking on each other, thrive;

Shoot up, grow galliard --

Yes, and more alive!

When one's away, it seems we both are less.

I was a Dwarf, an Urchin, I confess,.
Till you were present.

But a bird of wing,
Now, fit to fly before a Queen, or King.

I have not one sick feather sin' you came,
But turned a jollier Cupid.

Then I am.

I love my Mothers brain, could thus provide
For both in Court, and give us each our side,
Where we might meet.

Embrace.

Circle each other.

Confer, and whisper.

Brother, with a Brother.

And by this sweet Contention for the Palm,
Unite our appetites, and make them calm.

To will, and nill one thing.

And so to move
Affection in our Wills, as in our Love.

It is the place sure breeds it, where we are,

The King, and Queens Court, which is circular,
And perfect.

The pure school that we live in,
And is of purer Love, a Discipline.

NO more of your Poetry (pretty Cupids) lest presuming on your little wits,
you profane the intention of your service. The Place I confess, wherein (by
the Providence of your Mother Venus) you are now planted, is the divine School
of Love. An Academie, or Court, where all the true lessons of Love are
thoroughly read and taught. The Reasons, the Proportions, and Harmony, drawn
forth in analytick Tables, and made demonstrable to the Senses. Which if you
(Brethren) should report, and swear to, would hardly get credit above a Fable,
here in the edge of Darbyshire (the region of Ale) because you relate in Rhyme.
O, that Rhyme is a shrewd disease, and makes all suspected it would persuade.
Leave it, pretty Cupids, leave it. Rhyme will undo you, and hinder your
growth, and reputation in Court, more then any thing beside you have either
mentioned, or feared. If you dable in Poetry once, it is done of your being
believed, or understood here. No man will trust you in this Verge, but conclude
you for a mere case of Canters, or a pair of wandering Gypsies

Return to your selves (little Deities) and admire the Miracles you serve,
this excellent King, and his unparalled Queen, who are the Canons, the
Decretals, and whole Schoole-Divinitie of Love. Contemplate, and study them.
Here shall you read Hymen, having lighted two Torches, either of which inflame
mutually, but waste not. One Love by the others aspect increasing, and both in
the right lines of aspiring. The Fates spinning them round and even threads, and
of their whitest wool, without brack, or purle. Fortune, and Time fettered at
their feet with Adamantine Chains, their wings deplum'd, for starting from
them. All amiablenesse in the richest dress of delight and colors, courting
the season to tarry by them, and make the Idea of their Felicity perfect;
together with the love, knowledge, and duty of their Subjects perpetual. So
wishes the glad, and grateful Client, seated here, the overjoyed Master of
the house; and prays that the whole Region about him could speak but his
language. Which is, that first the Peoples love would let that People know
their own happiness, and that knowledge could confirm their duties, to an
admiration of your sacred Persons; descended, one from the most peaceful, the
other the most warlike, both your pious, and just progenitors; from whom, as
out of Peace came Strength, and out of the Strong came sweetness, alluding to
the holy Riddle, so in you joined by holy marriage in the flower and ripeness
of years, live the promise of a numerous Succession to your Scepters, and a
strength to secure your own Islands, with their own Ocean, but more your own
Palme-branches, the Types of perpetual Victory. To which, two words be added,
a zealous Amen, and ever rounded, with a Crown of Welcome. Welcome, Welcome.



