WHy Gentlemen, do you know what you do? ha! would you have kept me out?
Christmas, old Christmas? Christmas of London, and Captain Christmas? Pray you
let me be brought before my Lord Chamberlain, i will not be answered else: it is
merry in hall when beards wag all: I have seen the time you have wished for me,
for a merry Christmas, and now you have me; they would not let me in: I must
come another time! a good jest, as if I could come more then once a year;
why, I am no dangerous person, and so I told my friends, of the Guard. I am old
Gregory Christmas still, and though I come out of Popes-head-alley as good a
Protestant, as any in my Parish. The troth is, I have brought a Masque here, out
of the City, of my own making, and do present it by a set of my Sons,
that come out of the Lanes of London, good dancing boys all: It was intended I
confess for Curryers Hall, but because the weather has been open, and the
Livory were not at leisure to see it till a frost came that they cannot work.
I thought it convenient, with some little alterations, and the Groom of the
Revells hand to 't, to fit it for a higher place, which I have done; and though
I say it, another manner of devise then your New years night. Bones of bread,
the King! Son Rowland, Son Clem, be ready there in a trice; quick, Boys



NOw God preserve, as you well do deserve,
your Majesty's all, two there;
Your Highness small, with my good Lords all,
and Ladies, how do you do there?
Gi'me leave to ask, for I bring you a Masque
from little little little little London;
Which say the KING likes, I ha'passed the Pikes,
if not, old Christmas is undone.
A' peace, what is the matter there?


Here Is one, of Friday street would come in.


By no means, nor out of neither of the Fishstreets, admit not a man; they are
not Christmas creatures: Fish, and fasting days, foh! Sons, said I well?
look to it


No body out of Friday-street, nor the two Fish-streets there; do yo hear?


Shall John Butter of Milke-street come in? ask him.


Yes, he may slip in for a Torch-bearer, so he melt not too fast, that he will
last till the Masque be done


Right Son.


Our Dances freight, is a matter of eight,
and two, the which are Wenches;
In all they be ten, four Cocks to a Hen,
and will swim to the tune like Tenches.
Each has his knight, for to carry his light,
which some would say are Torches;
To bring them here, and to lead them there,
and home again to their own porches.
Now their intent --
Now, all the Lords bless me, where am I tro? where is Cupid: serve the King?
they may serve the Cobbler well enough, some of 'em, for any courtesy they have
y'wisse; they have need of mending: unrude people they are, your Courtiers, here
was thrust upon thrust indeed! was it ever so hard to get in before, tro


How now? what is the matter?


A place forsooth, I do want a place; I would have a good place to see my Child
act in before the KING, and QUEEN'S Majesty's (God bless 'em) to night


Why, here is no place for you.


Right forsooth, I am Cupids Mother, Cupids own Mother: forsooth; yes
forsooth: I dwell in pudding-lane; I forsooth, he is Prentise in Love-lane with
a Bugle-maker, that makes of your Bobs, and Bird-bolts for Ladies


Good Lady Venus of Pudding-lane, you must go out for all this.


Yes forsooth, I can sit any where, so I may see Cupid act; he is a pretty
Child, though I say it that perhaps should not, you will say: I had him by my
first Husband, he was a Smith forsooth, we dwelt in Doe-little lane then, he
came a month before his time, and that may make him somewhat imperfect: But I
was a Fishmongers daughter


No matter for your Pedigree, your house; good Venus will you depart?


I forsooth, he will say his part I warrant him, as well as ere a Play boy of 'em
all: I could have had money enough for him, an I would ha been tempted, and have
let him out by the week, to the Kings Players: Master Burbadge has been about
and about with me; and so has old Mr. Hemings too, they have need of him, where
is he tro'a? I would feign see him, pray God they have given him some drink
since he came


Are you ready Boys? strike up, nothing will drown this noise but a Drum: a'
peace, yet, I have not don


Why? here be half of the properties forgotten, Father.


Post and Pair wants his pur-chops, and his pur-dogs.


Have you nere a Son at the Groom-Porters to beg, or borrow a pair of Cards
quickly


It shall not need, here is your Son Chrater without; has Cards in his pocket.


Odds so; speak to the Guard to let him in, under the name of a property.


And here is New-yeares-gift h'as an Orange, and Rosmarie, but not a clove to
stick in it


Why, let one go to the Spicery.


Fie, fie, fie; it is naught, it is naught boys.


Why, I have cloves, if it be cloves you want, I have cloves in my purse, I
never go without one in my mouth


And Mumming, has not his vizard neither.


No matter, his own face shall serve for a punishment, and it is bad enough;
has Wassell her boule, and Mince-pie her spoones


I, I; but Mis-rule does not like his suite: he says the Players have lent him
one too little, on purpose to disgrace him


Let him hold his peace, and his disgrace will be the less: what? shall we
proclaim where we were furnished? Mum! Mum! a' peace, be ready good Boys


Now their intent, is above to present
with all the appurtenances
A right Christmas, as of old it was,
to be gathered out of the Dances.
Which they do bring, and before the King,
the Queen, and Prince, as it were now
Drawn here by Love; who, over and above,
does draw himself in the geere too.
Hum drum, sauce for a Coney;
no more of your Martial music:
Even for the sake, of the next new stake,
for there I do mean to use it.
And now to ye, who in place are to see,
with Roll and Farthingale hooped:
I pray you know, though he want his bow
by the wings, that this is Cupid.
He might go back, for to cry what you lack,
but that were not so witty:
His Cap, and Coat, are enough to note
that he is the Love of the City.
And he leads on, though he now begone,
for that was only his-rule:
But now comes in, Tom of Bosoms Inn,
and he presents Mis-rule.
Which you may know, by the very show,
albeit you never ask it:
For there you may see what his Ensigns be,
the Rope, the Cheese, and the Basket.
This Carol plays, and has been in his days
a chirping boy, and a kill pot:
Kit Cobbler it is, I Am a Father of his,
and he dwells in the lane, called Fil-pot.
But who is this? OF my daughter Sis
Mince-pie, with her do not dally
On pain of your life: She Is an honest Cooks wife,
and comes out of Scalding-Alley.
Next in the trace, comes Gambol in place,
and to make my tale the shorter:
My Son Hercules, taken, out of Distaffe-lane
but an active man, and a Porter.
Now Post and Pair, old Christmasses heir
does make, and a gingling Sally:
And wott you who, it is one of my two
Sons, Cardmakers in Pur-alley.
Next in a trice, with his box and his Dice,
Mac-pippin my Son, but younger,
Brings Mumming in; and the knave will win,
for a' is a Costermonger.
But New-yeares-gift, of himself makes shift
to tell you what his name is:
With Orange on head, and his Gingerbread,
Clem Waspe of Honey-lane it is.
This I you tell, is our jolly Wassell,
and for Twelfe-night more meet too:
She works by the Ell, and her name is Nell,
and she dwells in Thred-needle-street too.
Then Offering he, with his Dish, and his Tree,
that in every great house keeps;
Is by my Son, young Little-worth done,
and in Penny-rich-street he sleeps.
Last, Baby-cake, that an end does make
of Christmas merry, merry vain a
Is Child Rowlan, and a straight young man,
though he come out of Crooked-lane' a.
There should have been, and a dozen I wene,
but I could find but one more;
Child of Christmas, and a Logge it was,
when I them all had gone ore.
I prayed him, in a time so trim,
that he would make one to praunce it:
And I my self, would have been the twelfe,
of hut Log was to heavy to dance it.
You worthy wights, King, Lords, and Knights,
or Queen, and Ladies bright:
Cupid invites, you to the sights
he shall present to night.

It Is a good child, speak out, hold up your head Love.


And which Cupid -- and which Cupid, etc.


Do not shake so Robin, if thou be a'cold, I have some warm waters for thee,
here


Come, you put Robin Cupid out with your waters, and your fisling; will you be
gone


I forsooth; he is a child, you must conceive, and must be used tenderly; he
was never in such an assembly before forsooth, but once at Warmoll Quest,
forsooth, where he said grace as prettily as any of the Sheriffs Hinch-boyes
forsooth


Will you peace, forsooth?


And which Cupid, and which Cupid, etc.


I that is a good boy, speak plain, Robin: how does his Majesty like him, I
pray? will he give eight pence a day think you? speak out Robin


Nay, he is out enough, you may take him away, and begin your Dance; this it is
to have speeches


You wrong the Child, you do wrong the Infant; IN peale to his Majesty.


Well done Boys, my fine Boys, my bully Boys.


NOr do you think that their legs is all
the commendation of my Sons,
For at the Artillery-Garden they shall
as well (forsooth) use their Guns.
And march as fine, as the Muses nine,
along the streets of London:
And i'their brave tires, to gi'their false fires,
especially Tom my Son.
Now if the Lanes and the Allies afford,
such an ac-ativitie as this:
At Christmas next, if they keep their word,
can the children of Cheapside miss?
Though, put the case, when they come in place,
they should not dance, but hop:
Their very gold lace, with their silk would'em grace,
having so many knights, of the Shop!
But were I so wise, I might seem to advise
so great a Potentate as your self:
They should Sir, I tell ye, spar't out of their belly,
and this way spend some of their pelf.
I, and come to the Court, for to make you some sport,
at the least once every year:
As Christmas has done, with his seventh or eigth Son,
and his couple of Daughters dear.

