COme, now my head's in, I Will even venture the whole: I ha seen the Lions ere
now, and he that has seen them may see the King


I think he may; but have a care you go not too high (neighbor Notch) least
you chance to have a Tally made of your pate, and be clawed with a cudgel;
there is as much danger going too near the King, as the Lions


Whither? whither now gamesters? what is the business? the affair? stop I
beseech you


This must be an Officer, or nothing, he is so peart and breife in his demands!
a pretty man! and a pretty man is a little of this side nothing; howsoever we
must not be daunted now, I am sure I am a greater man than he out of the Court,
and I have lost nothing of my Sire since I came to it


Hey-da! what is this? A hogshead of beer broake out of the Kings buttery, to
some Dutch Hulke! whether are you bound? The wind is against you, you must
back; do you know where you are


Yes sir, if we be not mistaken, we are at the Court, and would be glad to
speak with something of less authority, and more wit, that knows a little in
the place


Sir, I know as little as any man in the place; speak, what is your business?
I am an Officer, Groom of the Revels, that is my place


To fetch Bonge of Court a parcel of invisible bread, and beer for the
Plaiers (for they never see it) or to mistake six Torches from the Chandry,
and give them one


How sir?


Come, this is not the first time you have carried coals to your own house, I
mean that should have warmed them


Sir, I may do it by my place, and I must question you farther.


Be not so musty sir, our desire is only to know whether the Kings Majesty, and
the Court expect any disguise here to night


Disguise! what mean you by that? do you think that his Majesty sits here to
expect drunkards


No, if he did, I believe you would supply that place better then you do this:
Disguise was the old English word for a Masque sir, before you were an
implement belonging to the Revels


There is no such word in the Office now I assure you sir, I have served here,
man, and boy a Prentiship or twain, and I should know. But, by what name so
ever you call it, here will be a Masque, and shall be a Masque, when you and
the rest of your Comrogues shall sit disguised in the stocks


Sure by your language you were never meant for a Cour^ier, howsoever it has
been your ill fortune to be taken out of the nest young; you are some
Constables egg, some such Widgin of Authority, you are so easily offended!
Our coming was to show our loves sir, and to make a little merry with his
Majesty to night, and we have brought a Masque with us, if his Majesty had not
been better provided


Who you? you a Masque? why you stincke like so many bloat-herrings newly taken
out of the chimney! In the name of Ignorance, whence came you? or what are you?
you have been hanged in the smoke sufficiently, that is smelt out already


Sir, we do come from among the Brewhouses in Saint Katherines, that is true,
there you have smoked us (the Docke comfort your nosthrills,) and we may have
lived in a mist there, and so mist our purpose; but for mine own part I have
brought my properties with me to express what I am; the keys of my calling
hang here at my girdle, and this the Register book of my function shows me
no less then a Clarke at all points, and a Brewers Clarke, and a Brewers head
Clarke


A man of account sir! I cry you mercy.


I sir, I knew him a fine Merchant, a merchant of Hops, till all hopt into the
water


No more of that, what I have been, I have been; what I am, I am: I Peter
Notch, Clarke, hearing the Christmas invention was drawn dry at Court; and
that neither the KINGS Poet, nor his Architect had wherewithal left to
entertain so much as a Baboone of quality, nor scarce the Welsh Ambassador if
he should come there: Out of my allegiance, to wit, drew in some other friends
that have as it were presumed out of their own naturalls, to fill up the vacuum
with some pretty presentation, which we have addressed, and conveyed hither
in a Lighter at the general charge, and landed at the back door of the
Buttery, through my neighbor Slug's credit there


A poor Lighter-man sir, one that has had the honor sometimes to lay in the
Kings beer there; and I assure you I heard it in no worse place then the very
Buttry, for a certain, there would be no Masque, and from such as could
command a jacke of beer, two, or three


Dat is all true, exceeding true, de inventors be barren, lost, two, dre, vour
mile, I know that from my selven; dey have no ting, no ting van deir own, but
dat dey take vrom de eard, or de zea, or de heaven, or de hell, or de rest van
de veir Clementen, de place a, dat be so common as de vench in de Burdello. Now
me would bring in some dainty new ting, dat never was, nor never sall be in de
rebus natura; dat has neder van de materia, nor de forma, nor de hoffen, nor de
voote, but a mera devisa of de brain --


Hey-da! what Hans Flutter kin is this? what Dutchman does build or frame
Castles in the Air


He is no Dutch man sir, he is a Britain borne, but has learned to misuse
his own tongue in travel, and now speaks all languages in ill English; a
rare Artist he is sir, and a Projector of Masks. His Project in ours is, that
we should all come from the three dancing Bears in Saint Katherines (you may
hap know it sir) hard by where the Priest fell in, which Alehouse is kept by a
distressed Lady; whose name (for the honor of Knighthood) will not be known;
yet she is come in person here Errant, to fill up the adventure with her two
women that draw drink under her, Gentlewomen borne all three, I assure you


And were three of those Gentlewomen that should have acted in that famous
matter of Englands joy in six hundred and three


What talk you of England's joy, Gentlemen? you have another matter in hand I
wis, Englands sport and delight if you can manage it. The poor Cattle yonder
are passing away the time, with a cheat loaf, and a bumbard of broken beer,
how will ye dispose of them


Cattle! what cattle does she mean?


No worse then the Kings game I assure you; The Bears, Bears both of quality
and fashion, right Bears, true Bears


A devise only to express the place from whence we come (my Ladies house) for
which we have borrowed three very Bears that (as her Ladyship aforesaid says)
are well bred, and can dance to present the sign, and the Beareward to stand
for the signe-poast


That is pretty; but are you sure you have sufficient Bears for the purpose.


Very sufficient Bears as any are in the Ground, the Parish-Garden, and can
dance at first sight, and play their own tunes if need be. John Vrson the
Beare-ward, offers to play them with any Citie-dancers christened, for a ground
measure


Marry, for lofty tricks, or dancing on the Ropes he will not undertake, it is
out of their element he says. Sir, all our request is since we are come, we
may be admitted, if not for a Masque, for an Antickmask; and as we shall
deserve therein, we desire to be returned with credit to the Buttry from whence
we came, for reward, or to the Porters Lodge with discredit, for our punishment


To be whipped with your Bears? Well, I could be willing to venture a good word
in behalf of the Game, if I were assured the aforesaid game would be cleanly,
and not fright the Ladies


For that sir, the Bear-ward has put in security, by warranting my Lady and
her Women to dance the whole changes with them in safety; and for their abusing
the place you shall not need to fear, for he has given them a kind of
Dyet-bread to bind them to their good behavior


Well, let them come; if you need one, I Will help you my self.


THough it may seem rude
For me to intrude,
With these my Bears by chance-a;
'Twere sport for a King,
If they could sing
As well as they can dance-a
Then to put you out
Of fear or doubt,
We came from St. Katharin-a;
These dancing three,
By the help of me,
Who am the Post of the signe-a
We sell good ware,
And we need not care
Though Court, and Country knew it:
Our Ale's of the best,
And each good guest
Prays for their souls that brew it.
For any Alehouse,
We care not a lowse,
Nor Tavern in all the Towne-a;
Nor the Vintry Cranes,
Nor St. Clements Danes,
Nor the Devil can put us down-a,
Who has once there been,
Comes thither again,
The liquour is so mighty;
Beer strong and stale,
And so is our Ale,
And it burns like Aquavita.
To a stranger there,
If any appear,
Where never before he has bin;
We show the iron Gate,
The wheel of St. Kate,
And the place where the Priest fell in.
The Wives of Wapping
They trudge to our tapping,
And still our Ale desire;
And there sit and drink,
Till the spue, and stink,
And often piss out our fire.
From morning to night,
And about to daylight,
They sit and never grudge it;
Till the Fish-wives join
Their single coin,
And the Tinker pawnes his budget.
If their brains be not well,
Or their bladders do swell,
To ease them of their burden;
My Lady will come
With a bowl and a broom,
And her Hand-mayd with a Jorden.
From Court we invite
Lord, Lady, and knight;
Squire, gentlman, yeoman and groom.
And all our stiff drinkers,
Smiths, Porters, and Tinkers,
And the beggars shall give ye room.
How like you? how like you?


Excellent! The Bears have done learnedly, and sweetly.


It Is noting, it is noting; vill you see someting? Ick sall bring in de Turk^chen,
met all zin Bashawes, and zin dirty towsand Yanitsaries met all zin Whooren
Cunuken, all met an auder, de Sofie van Persia, de Tartar Cham met de great
King of Mogull, and make deir men, and deir horse, and deir Elephant en be
seen fight in de air, and be all killen, and aliven, and no such ting. And
all dis met de Ars van de Catropricks, by de reflesbie van de glassen


Oh, he is an admirable Artist.


And a half sir.


But where will he place his glasses?


Fow, dat is all ean, as it be two, dree, veir, vife tousand Mile off: Ick sall
multipliren de vizioun, met an ander secret dat Ick heb: Spreck, vat vil you
haben


Good sir put him toot, bid him do something that is impossible; he will
undertake it I warrant you


I do not like the Mogul, nor the great Turk, nor the Tartar, their names are
somewhat to big for the Room; marry if he could show us some Country Plaiers,
strolling about in several Shires, without license from the Office, that would
please I know whom, or some Welsh Pilgrims


Pilgrim? now you talk of de Pilgrim, it come in my head, Ick vill show you
all de whole brave Pilgrim o'de Vorld: de Pilgrim dat go now, now at de
instant, two, dre towsand Mile to de great Mahomet, at de Mecha, or here, dear,
every where, make de fine Labyrints, and show all de brave error in de vorld


And shall we see it here?


Yau, here, here, here in dis Room, it is very Room: vel vat is dat to you if
Ick do de ting? vat an devil, vera boten devil?


Nay, good sir be not angry.


It Is a disease that follows all excellent men, they cannot govern their
passions; but let him alone, try him one 'bout


I would try him, but what has all this to do with our Mask?


O Sir, all de better vor an Antick-maske, de more absurd it be, and vrom de
purpose, it be ever all de better. If it go from de nature of de ting, it is
de more Art: for dear is Art, and dear is Nature, you sall see.
Hochos-pochos, Paucos, Palabros


IT is no dream, you all do wake, and see;
Behold, who comes! Phoebus he
That can both hurt and
Rear Towns, and make societies rejoice;
That taught the Muses all their harmony,

Apollo stoopes, and when a God descends,
May Mortals think he has no vulgar ends.

and all
My sacred Sons, rise at your Fathers call
From your immortal Graves; where sleep, not death,
Yet binds your powers.
Here.


Here.


What sacred breath
Does re-inspire us?

Who is this we feel?


What heat creepes through me, as when burning steel
Is dipped in water?

I, Phoemonoe,
Thy Father Phoebus 's fury fills thee;
Confess my Godhead; once again I call,
Let whole Apollo enter in you all,
And follow me.

We fly, we do not tread,
The Gods do use to ravish whom they lead.

BEhold the love and care of all the Gods
Of the Ocean, and the happy Isles;
That whilst the World about him is at ods,
Sits Crowned Lord here of himself, and smiles.
To see the erring mazes of mankind;
Who seek for that, does punish them to find.

PRince of thy Peace, see what it is to love
The Powers above!
Jove has commanded me
To visit thee;
And in thine honor with my

Of tunefull Augures, whose divining skill,
shall wait thee still,
And be the Heralds of his highest will.
The work is done,
And I have made their President thy Son;
Great Mars too, on these nights,
Salian rites.
Yond, yond afar,
They closed in their
And each one guided by a star.

Haste, haste, to meet them, and as they advance
'twixt every Dance;
Let us interpret their Prophetic trance.

WHich way, and whence the lightning flew,
Or how it burned, bright, and blew,
Design, and figure by your lights:
Then forth, and show the several flights
Your
Or voice in Augurie does bring.
Which hand the Crow cried on, how high
The Vulture, or the Erne did fly,
What wing the Swan made, and the Dove,
The Storke, and which did get above:
Show all the Birds of food or Prey,
But pass by the unluckie Jay,
The Night-Crow, Swallow, or the Kite
Let those have neither right, CHOR. Nor part,
In this nights art.

THe Signs are
There has not been a voice, or flight
Of ill Presage. Linus. The
Her Augurie alone to Kings
The Dove, has flowne. Orpheus. And to thy peace
Fortunes and the Fates increase.

Minerva's Hernshaw and her Owl,
Do both proclaim, thou shall control
The course of things. Idmon. As now they be
With tumult carried: Apollo. And live free
From hatred, faction, or the fear,
To blast the Olive thou do wear.

More is behind, which these do long to show,
And what the Gods to so great virtue owe.

Still, still the
We wish it were but understood;
It even puts Apollo
To all his strengths of art, to follow,

What Is meant by every Sign.
Thou can not less be, then the charge
of every Dietie.
That thus art left here to enlarge,
And shield their piety!
Thy neighbors at thy fortune long have gazed,
But at thy wisdom, all do stand amazed.
And wish to be,
Overcome, or governed by thee!
Safety it self so sides thee, where thou go,
And Fate still offers what thou covet'st most!

Do not expect to hear of all
Your good at once, lest it forestall
A sweetness would be new:
Some things the Fates would have concealed
From us the Gods, lest being revealed
Our powers shall envy you.
It is enough your people learn
The reverence of your peace
As well as Strangers do discern
The Glories, by the increase
And that the Augur here, your Son
Do by his Fathers lights his courses run.
Him shall you see triumphing over all
Both foes and vices: and your young and tall
Nephews, his Sons grow up in your embraces,
To give this Island Princes in long races.

SEE heaven expects my return*
The forked fire begins to burn,
Jove beckons to me come.

Though Phoebus be the god of Arts,
He must not take on him all parts:
But leave his Frather some.

My arts are only to obey. JOVE.
Jove is that one, whom first, midst, last, you call
The power that governes, and conserveth all;
Earth, Sea, and Air, are subject to our check,
And Fate with heaven, moving at our beck.
Till Jove it ratify,
It is no Augurie,
Though uttered by the mouth of Destiny.

Dear father, give the Sign, and seal it then.


It is the suit of Earth and Men.


What do their Mortals crave without our wrong?


That Jove will lend us this our Sovereign long;
Let our grandchildren, and not we,
His want or Absence ever see.

Your wish is blessed.
Jove knocks his Chin against his breast,
And firmes it with the rest.

Sing then his fame, through all the orbs; in even
Proportions, rising still, from Earth to Heaven:
And of the lasting of it leave to doubt,
The power of time shall never put that out.

This done, the whole Scaene shut, and the Maskers danced their last Dance.


