A MASQUE OF THE METAMORPHOS'D GYPSIES.

AS IT WAS THRICE PRESENTED TO KING JAMES.

FIRST, AT BVRLEIGH on the Hill.

NEXT, AT BELVOYR.

AND LASTLY, AT WINDSOR.

AUGUST, 1621.

AS many blessings as there be bones
In Ptolome's fingers and all at ones,
Held up in Andrews Cross for the nones.
Light on you good Master,
I dare be no waster
Of time, or of speech
Where you are in place:
I only beseech
You take in good grace,
Our following the Court,
Since it is for your sport
To have you still merry,
And not make you weary.
We may strive to please,
So long (some will say) till we grow a disease
But you Sir, that twice
Have graced us already, encourage to thrice;
Wherein if our boldness your patience invade,
Forgive us the fault that your favor has made.
IF for our thoughts there could but speech be found,
And all that speech be uttered in one sound;
So that some power above us would afford
The means to make a language of a word,
It should be welcome: In that only voice
We would receive, retain, enjoy, rejoice;
And all effects of love, and life dispense,
Till it were called a copious eloquence:
For should we vent our spirits (now you are come,)
In other sillables, were as to be dumb.
Welcome, o welcome then, and enter here,
The House your bounty has built, and still does reere
With those high favovrs, and those heap't increases,
Which shows a hand not greev'd, but when it ceases.
The Master is your creature, as the place;
And every good about him is your grace:
Whom though he stand by silent, think not rude,
But as a man turned all to gratitude.
For what he never can hope, how to restore,
Since while he meditates one, you heap on more.
Vouchsafe to think, he only is oppressed
With their abundance, not that in his breast
His pow'res are stupid grown; for please you enter
Him, and his house, and search them to the center:
You Will find within no thanks, or vows there shorter,
For having trusted thus much to his Porter.
Room for the five Princes of Aegipt, mounted all upon the Horse like the
four Sons of Aymon, to make the miracle the more, by a head, if it may be:
gaze upon them, as on the Offspring of Ptolomie, begotten upon several
Cleopatraes, in their several Countries; especially on this brave Spark
struck out of Flint-shire, upon Justice Jugges Daughter then Sheriff of the
County; who running away with a kinsman of our Captains, and her Father
pursuing her to the Marshes, He great with Justice, She great with Juggling,
they were both for the time turned stone upon the fight each of other, in
Chester: Till at last (see the Wonder) A Jugge of the Town Ale reconciling
them; the memorial of both their gravities, his in beard, and hers in belly,
has remained ever since preserved in picture upon the most stone Jugs of the
Kingdom. The famous impe yet grew a wretchcocke, and though for seven years
together, he were very carefully carried at his mothers back, rocked in a
cradle of Welch-cheese, like a Maggot, and there fed with broken beer, and
blown wine of the best daily; yet looks he, as if he never saw his
Guinquennium. It Is true, he can thread needles o'horse-backe, to draw a yard of
inckle through his nose: But what is that to a grown Gypsy, one of the blood,
and of his time if he had thrived: Therefore, till with his painful
Progenitors, he be able to beat it on the hard hoof, or the been Bawse, or the
Starling, Ken to nip a Jan, and Cly the Jack; it is thought fit he march in the
Infants equipage

With the Convoy, Cheats, and peckage,
Out of Clutch of Harman Beckage,
To their libkins at the Crackmans,
Or some skipper of the Blackmans.

WHere the Cacklers, but no Grunters,
Shall uncas'd be for the Hunters,
Those we still must keep alive;
I, and put them out to thrive
In the Parkes, and in the Chases,
And the finer walled places;
As Saint James-es, Greenwich, Tibballs,
Where the Acornes plumpe as Chibballs,
Soon shall change both kind and name,
And proclaime'em the Kings game.
So the act no harm may be
Unto their keeper Barnabee;
It will prove as good a service,
As did ever Gypsy Jervice,
To our Captain Charles the tall man,
And a part too of our Salmon.

IF we here be a little obscure, it is our pleasure; for rather than we will
offer to be our own interpreters, we are resolved not to be understood: yet if
any man doubt of the significancie of the language, we refer him to the
third vollume of reports, set forth by the learned in the laws of Canting, and
published in the Gypsies tongue: Give me my Guittarra, and room for our Chief

FRom the famous Peacke of Darby,
And the Devils arse there hard-by,
Where we yearly keep our musters,
Thus the Aegiptians throng in clusters,
Be not frighted with our fashion,
Though we seem a tattered Nation;
We account our rags, our riches,
So our tricks exceed our stitches.
Give us Bacon, rindes of Walnuts,
Shells of Cockels, and of Smalnuts;
Ribands, bells, and Safrond lynnen,
All the World is ours to win in.
Knackes we have that will delight you,
slight of hand that will invite you,
To endure our tawny faces.
WOE. Quit your places, and not cause you cut your laces.
All your fortunes we can tell ye,
Be they for the back or belly;
In the Moodes too, and the Tenses,
That may fit your fine five senses.
Draw but then your gloves we pray you,
And sit still, we will not fray you;
For though we be here at Burley,
We Would be loath to make a hurly.


STay my sweet Singer,
The touch of thy finger,
A little, and linger;
For me that am bringer
Of bound to the border,
The rule and Recorder,
And mouth of the order,
As Priest of the game,
And Prelate of the same.
There Is a Gentry Cove here,
Is the top of the Shiere,
Of the Bever Ken,
A man among men;
You need not to fear,
I have an eye, and an ear
That turns here and there,
To look to our gear.
Some say that there be
One or two, if not three,
That are greater then he.
ANd for the Roome-Morts,
I know by their ports,
And their jollie resorts,
They are of the sorts
That love the true sports
Of King Ptolomeus,
Or great Coriphaeus,
And Queen Cleopatra,
The Gypsies grand Matra.
Then if we shall sharke it,
Here Fair is, and Market.
Leave Pig by, and Goose,
And play fast, and loose,
A short cut, and long,
Some inch of a song,
Pythagoras lot,
Drawn out of a pot;
With what says Alchindus?
And Pharaotes Indus,
John de Indagine
With all their Pagine
Of faces and Palmistrie,
And this is Almistrie.
Lay by your wimbles,
Your boring for thimbles,
Or using your nimbles,
In diving the pockets,
And sounding the sockets
Of Simper-the Cockets;
Or angling the purses,
Of such as will curse us;
But in the strict duel
Be merry, and cruel,
Strike fair at some jewel,
That mine may accrue well,
For that is the fuel,
To make the Town brew well,
And the pot wring well,
And the brain sing well,
Which we may bring well
About by a string well,
And do the thing well.
It is but a strain
Of true legerdemaine,
Once twice and again.
Or what will you say now
If with our fine play now,
Our feats, and our fingring,
Here without lingering;
Cosening the sights
Of the Lords, and the knights.
Some one of their Georges
Come off to save charges.
Or what will you say now?
If with our fine play now,
Our knackes, and our dances,
We work on the fancies
Of some of these Nancies.
These trinckets, and tripsies,
And make'em turn Gypsies.
Here Is no Justice Lippus
Will seek for to nip us,
In Crampring, or Cippus,
And then for to strip us,
And after to whip us.
His justice to vary,
While here we do tarry,
But be wise, and wary,
And we may both carry,
The Kate, and the Mary,
And all the bright ae'ry,
A way to the quarry.
The George and the Garter,
Into our own quarter;
Or durst I go further
In methood and order:
There Is a purse and a Seal,
I have a great mind to steal.
That when our tricks are done,
We might seal our own pardon;
All this we may do,
And a great deal more too,
If our brave Ptolomee,
Will but say follow me.

Captain, if ever at the Bozing Ken,
You have in draught of Darby drilled your men;
And we have served there armed all in Ale,
With the brown bowl, and charged in bragget stale:
If mustered thus, and disciplined in drink,
In our long watches we did never shrink,
But so commanded by you kept our station,
As we preserved our selves a royal Nation;
And never yet did branch of Statute break,
Made in your famous Pallas of the Peake.
If we have deemed, that Mutton, Lamb, or Veale,
Chicke, Capon, Turkey, sweetest we did steal;
As being by our Magna Charta taught
To judge no urands wholesome that are bought.
If for our Linen we still used the lift,
And with the hedge (our trades increase) made shift;
And ever at your solemn feast, and calls,
We have been ready with the Egyptian bralls;
To set Kit Callot forth in Prose or Rhyme,
Or who was Cleopatra for the time.
If we have done this, that, more, such, or so;
Now lend your ear but to the Patrico.

Well, Dance another strain, and we will think how

THe faery beam upon you,
The stars to glister on you;
A Moon of light,
In the noone of night,
Till the Fire-drake has over gone you.
The wheel of fortune guide you,
The Boy with the bow beside you;
Run aye in the way,
Till the bird of day,
And the luckier lot beside you.
Bless my sweet Masters, the old, and the young,
From the gall of the heart, and the stroke of the tongue.
With you luckie Bird I begin, let me see,
I aim at the best, and I trow you are he,
Here Is some luck already, if I understand
The grounds of mine Art; here is a Gentleman's hand.
I Will kiss it for lucks sake, you shall by this line
Love a Horse, and a Hound; but no part of a swine.
To hunt the brave Stagge, not so much for the food,
As the weal of your body, and the health o'your blood.
Your a man of good means, and have Territories store
Both by Sea, and by Land; and were borne Sir to more,
Which you like a Lord, and the Prince of your peace,
Content with your havings, despise to increase:
You are no great Wencher, I see by your table,
Although your Mons Veneris says you are able;
You live chaste, and single, and have buried your Wife,
And mean not to marry, by the line of your life.
Whence he that conjectures, your quality learnes,
You are an honest good man, and care of your Barnes.
Your Mercuries hill too, a wit does betoken,
Some booke-craft you have, and are pretty well spoken.
But stay, in your Jupiters mount, what is here?
A King, a Monarch; what wonders appear!
High, Bountiful, Just: a Jove for your parts,
A Master of men, and that Reign in their hearts.
I Will tell it my train,
And come to you again.

TO the old, long life and treasure,
To the young, all health and pleasure;
To the fair, their face
With eternal grace,
And the foul to be loved at leisure.
To the witty, all clear mirrors,
To the foolish, their dark errors;
To the loving sprite,
A secure delight,
To the jealous his own false terrors.
After which the Kings fortune is pursued by the
COuld any doubt that saw this hand,
Or who you are, or what command
You have upon the fate of things,
Or would not say you were let down
From Heaven, on earth to be the Crown,
And top of all your neighbor Kings?
To see the ways of truth you take,
To sallance business, and to make
All Christian differences cease.
Or till the quarrel, and the cause
You can compose, to give them laws,
As arbitor of War, and Peace.
For this, of all the world you shall
Be styled James, the just, and all
Their states dispose, their Sons and daughters,
And for your fortune you alone,
Among them all shall work your own,
By peace, not by human slaughters.
But why do I presume, though true,
To tell a Fortune, Sir, to you,
Who are the maker here of all;
Where none do stand, or sit in view,
But owe their fortune unto you,
At least what they good fortunes call?
My self a Gypsy here do shine,
Yet are you maker, Sir, of mine.
Oh that confession could content
So high a bounty, that does know
No part of motion, but to flow,
and giving never to repent.
May still the matter wait your hand,
That it not feel, or stay, or stand;
but all desert still over charge.
And may your goodness ever find
In me whom you have made, a mind,
As thankful as your own is large.

AS my Captain has begun
With the Sire, I take the Son,
Your hand Sir.
Of your fortune be secure,
Love, and she, are both at your
Command Sir.
See what States are here at strife,
Who shall tender you a Wife,
A brave one;
And a fitter for a man,
Then is offered here, you can
Not have one.
She is Sister of a star,
One the noblest now that are,
Bright Hesper.
Whom the Indians in the East,
Phosphore call, and in the West,
Hight Vesper.
Courses even with the Sun,
Does her mighty brother run,
For splendour.
What can to the marriage night,
More then morn, and evening light
Attend her?
Save the promise before day,
Of a little James to play
Hereafter.
Twixt his Grandsiers knees, and move
All the pretty ways of love,
And laughter.
Whilst with care you strive to please,
In your giving his cares ease,
And labors;
And by being long the aid
Of the Empire, make afraid
III Neighbors.
Till your self shall come to see
What we wish, yet far to be
Attending:
For it skills not when, or where
That begins, which cannot fear
An ending.
Since your name in peace, or wars,
Naught shall bound until the stars
up take you.

Hurl after an old shoe,
I Will be merry what ever I do,
Though I keep no time,
My words shall chyme,
I Will over-take the sense with a ryme.
Face of a rose
I pray thee depose
Some small piece of silver: It shall be no loss,
But only to make the sign of the cross;
If your hand you hallow,
Good fortune will follow.
I swear by these ten,
You shall have it again,
I do not say when.
But Lady, either I am tipsie,
Or you are to fall in love with a Gypsy;
Blush not Dame Kate,
For early, or late,
I do assure you it will be your fate;
Nor need you be once ashamed of it Madam,
He Is as handsome a man, as ever was Adam.
A man out of wax,
As a Lady would axe;
Yet he is not to wed ye:
H'has enjoyd you already,
And I hope he has sped ye.
A dainty young fellow,
And though he look yellow,
He never will be jealous,
But love you most zealous.
There Is never a line in your hand but does tell us.
And you are a foul so white, and so chaste,
A table so smooth, and so newly ra'ste,
As nothing called foul,
Dare approach with a blot,
Or any least spot;
But still you control,
Or make your own lot,
Preserving love pure as it first was begot:
But Dame I must tell ye,
The fruit of your belly,
Is that you must tender,
And care so to render;
That as your self came
In blood, and in name,
From one house of fame,
So that may remain
The glory of twain.

YOu sweet Lady have a hand too,
And a fortune you may stand too;
Both your brav'ry, and your bounty
Style you Mistress of the County;
You will find it from this night,
Fortune shall forget her spite,
And heap all the blessings on you,
That she can pour out upon you;
To be loved, where most you love,
Is the worst that you shall prove;
And by him to be embraced,
Who so long has known you chaste,
Wise, and fair; whilst you renew
Joys to him, and he to you:
And when both your years are told,
Neither think the other old.

MAdam we know of your coming so late,
We could not well fit you a nobler fate
Then what you have ready made;
An old man's wife,
Is the light of his life,
A young one is but his shade.
You will not importune,
The change of your fortune;
For if you dare trust to my forecasting,
It Is presently good, and will be lasting.

YOur pardon Lady, here you stand,
If some should judge you by your hand
The greatest fellon in the Land
Detected:
I cannot tell you by what Arts,
But you have stolen so many hearts,
As they would make you at all parts
Suspected.
Your very face first, such a one
As being viewed it was alone,
Too slipperie to be looked upon;
And threw men.
But then your graces they were such,
As none could er'e behold too much;
Both every taste, and every touch
So drew men.
Still blessed in all you think, or do,
Two of your Sons are Gypsies too,
You shall our Queen be, and see who
Importunes
The heart of either yours, or you;
And does not wish both George, and Sue,
And every Barn besides, all new
Good fortunes.

Help me wonder, here is a book,
Where I would for ever look;
Never yet did Gypsy trace,
Smoother lines in hands, or face:
Venus here does Saturn move
That you should be Queen of love;
And the other Stars consent,
Only Cupid not content;
For though you the theft disguise,
You have told him of his eyes:
And to show his envy further,
Here he charge you with murder;
Says, although that at your sight,
He must all his troches light;
Though your either cheeks discloses,
Mingled bathes of milk and Roses,
Though your lips be banks of blisses,
Where he plants, and gathers kisses;
And your self the reason why,
Wisest men for love may dye,
You will turn all hearts to tinder,
And shall make the World one cinder.

Mistress, of a fayrer table
Has not history, nor sable;
Others fortunes may be shown,
You are builder of your own.
And what ever Heaven has given you,
You preserve the state still in you,
That which time would have depart,
Youth without the help of Art,
You do keep still, and the glory
Of your Sex, is but your story.

THough you Sir be Chamberlain, I have a key
To open your fortune a little by the way;
You are a good man,
Deny it that can;
And faithful you are,
Deny it that dare.
You know how to use your sword and your Pen,
And you love not alone the Arts, but the men;
The graces and Muses every where follow
You, as you were their second Apollo;
Only your hand here tells you to your face,
You have wanted one grace,
To perform, what has been a right of your place;
For by this line which is Mars his Trench,
You never yet helped your Master to a Wench:
It Is well for your honor he is pious, and chaste,
Or you had most certainly been displaste.

AS happy a Palm Sir, as most in the Land,
It should be a pure, and an innocent hand;
And worthy the trust,
For it says you will be just,
And carry that Purse,
Without any curse
Of the Publique-weale,
When you take out the Seal,
You do not appear,
A Judge of a year.
I Will venture my life
You never had wife,
But i will venture my skill,
You may when you will.
You have the Kings conscience too in your breast,
And that is a good guest;
Which you will have true touch of,
And yet not make much of;
More then by truth your self forth to bring,
The man that you are, for God, and the King.

I Come to borrow, and you will grant my demand Sir,
Since it is for no money, pray lend me your hand Sir;
And yet this good hand if you please to stretch it,
Had the Errant been money, could easily fetch it;
You command the Kings treasure, and yet on my soul
You handle not much, for your palm is not foul:
Your fortune is good, and will be to set
The Office upright, and the King out of debt;
To put all that have Pensions soon out of their pain,
By bringing the Exchequer in credit again.

HOnest, and old,
In those the good part of a fortune is told;
God send you your health,
The rest is provided, honor, and wealth;
All which you possess,
Without the making of any man less,
Nor need you my warrant, enjoy it you shall,
For you have a good Privie-Seale for it all.

NExt the great Master, who is the Donor,
I read you here the preserver of honor,
And spy it in all your singular parts,
What a father you are, and a nurse of the Arts.
By cherishing which, a way you have found,
How the free to all, to one may be bound,
And they again love their bonds; for to be
Obliged to you, is the way to be free:
But this is their fortune; Hark to your own,
Yours shall be to make true Gentry known
From the fictitious, not to prize blood
So much by the greatness, as by the good:
To show, and to open clear virtue the way,
Both whether she should, and how far she may;
And whilst you do judge twixt valor, and noise
To'extinguish the race of the roaring boys.

I find by this hand
You have the command
Of the very best man's house in the land:
Our Captain, and we,
Ere long will see
If you keep a good table;
Your Master's able.
And here be bountiful lines that say
You Will keep no part of his bounty away.
Thus written to Frank
On your Venus bank;
To prove a false steward you will find much ado,
Being a true one by blood, and by office too.

Only your hand, and welcome to Court,
Here is a man both for earnest, and sport.
You were lately employed
And your Master is joy'd
To have such in his train
So well can sustain
His person abroad,
And not shrink for the load.
But had you been here,
You should have been a Gypsy I swear,
Our Captain had summond you by a doxie,
To whom you would not have answered by proxy,
One, had she come in the way of your Scepter,
It Is ods, you had laid it by to have leapt her.

A Hunter you have been heretofore,
And had game good store;
But ever you went
Upon a new sent,
And shifted your loves
As often as they did their smockes, or their gloves:
But since that your brave intendments are
Now bent for the war,
The world shall see
You can constant be,
One Mistress to prove,
And court her for your love.
Pallas, shall be both your Sword, and your Gage;
Truth, bear your Shield, and fortune your Page,

WHy this is a sport,
See it North, see it South,
For the taste of the Court,

For the Courts own mouth.
Come Windsor, the Town,
With the Mayor, and oppose,
Weell put them all down,

Do -- do -- down like my hose.
A Gypsy in his shape
More calls the beholder,
Then the fellow with the Ape,

Or the Ape on his shoulder.
H'is a sight that will take
An old Judge from his Wench,
I, and keep him awake,

Yes, awake on the Bench.
And has so much worth,
Though he sit in the stocks,
He will draw the Girls forth,

I, forth i'their smocks.
Tut, a man's a man;
Let the Clownes with their Sluts
Come mend us if they can,

If they can, for their guts.
Come mend us, come lend us, their shouts, and their noise,

Like thunder, and wonder at Ptolomies boys.

OH the Lord! what be these? Tom do thou know? Come hither, come hither Dick,
did thou ever see such? the finest Olive-colour'd spirits, they have so
danced, and gingled here, as if they had been a set of over-growne Fayries


They should be Morris-dancers by their gingle, but they have no napkins:


No, nor a Hobbyhorse.


Oh, he is often forgotten, that is no rule; but there is no Maydmarian, nor
Friar amongst them, which is the surer mark


Nor a Fool that I see.


Unless they be all fools.


Well sed Tom fool; why thou simple pish Ass thou! did thou never see any
Gypsies? these are a covie of Gypsies, and the bravest new-come, that ever
Constable flew at; goodly game Gypsies, they are Gypsies of this year, of this
Moon in my conscience


Oh they are called the Moon men I remember now!


One shall hardly see such gentleman-like- Gypsies, though under a hedge in a
whole Summers day, if they be Gypsies


Male Gypsies all, not a Mort among them.


Where? where? I could never endure the sight of these Rogue-Gipsies, which be
they: I would feign see'em


Yonder they are.


Can they Cant, or Mill? are they masters of their Arts?


No bachelours these, they cannot have proceeded so far; they have scarce had
their time to be lousy yet


All the better; I would be acquainted with them while they are in clean life,
the 'ile do their tricks the cleanlier


We must have some music then, and take out the Wenches.


Music, we will have a whole poverty of pipers, call cheeks upon the Bagpipe,
and Tom Ticklefoot with his Tabor; see where he comes


I, and all the good wenches of Windsor; after him, yonder is Prue of the Park,


And Frances of the Castle;


And long Meg of Eaton;


And Christian of Dorny.


See the miracle of a Minstrell.


He Is able to muster up the smocks of the two Shieres;


And set the Codpeeces and they by the ears at pleasure.


I cannot hold now, there is my groat, let us have a fit for mirth sake.


Yes, and the'ile come about us for luck sake.


But look to our pockets, and purses, for our own sake.


I, I have the greatest charge; gather the money.


Come Girls, here be Gypsies come to town, let us dance'em down.


Sweet Doxies, and Dells,
My Roses, and Knells,
Scarce out of the shells,
Your hands nothing else.
We ring you no knells
With our Ptolomies bells,
Though we come from the fells,
But bring you good spells,
And tell you some chances,
In midst of your dances,
That fortune advances,
To Prudence, or Frances;
To Sisly, or Harry,
To Roger, or Mary,
Or Pegge of the Dary;
To Maudlin, or Thomas,
Then do not run from us,
Although we look tawny,
We are healthie, and brawny,
What ere your demand is,
Weell give you no jaundis.

Say you so old Gypsy? 'slid these go to it in rymes; this is better then
canting by tone half


Nay, you shall heare'em; peace, they begin with Prudence, mark that.


The wiser Gipsie's the Marry.


Are you advised?


Yes, and i will stand to it, that a wise Gypsy (take him at time o'year) is as
pollique a piece of flesh, as most Justices in the County where he stalks


To love a Keeper, your fortune will be;
But the Doucets better then him, or his fee.

Ha Prue, has he hit you in the teeth with a sweet bit?


Let her alone, she will swallow well enough; A learned Gypsy.


You Will hear more hereafter.


Marry, and i will listen; who stands next? Jack Cockrell.

You Will have good luck to horseflesh of my life,
You plowed so late with the Vicars wife.

A Prophet, a prophet, no Gypsy; or if he be a Gypsy, a divine Gypsy.


Mark Frances, now she is going to it, the virginity of the Parish.


Fear not, in hell you will never lead Apes;
A mortified maiden, of five scapes.

Birlady he touched the virgin string there a little too hard, they are arrant
learned men all I see; what say they upon Tom, Clod, List


Clods feet will in Christmas go near to be bare,
When he has lost all his hob nails at Post and pair.

Has hit the right nail o'th head, his own game.


And the very metal he deals in at play if you mark it.


Peace, who is this? Long Meg?


Long, and foul Meg, if she be a Meg, as ever I saw of her inches; pray God
they fit her with a fair fortune


They slip her, and treat upon Tickle-foot.


On Sundays you rob the poores box with your tabor,
The Collectors would do it, you save them a labor.

Faith but a little, they will do it non upstant.


Here Is my little Christian, forget, ha you any fortune left for her; a
straight-lac'd Christian of sixteen


Christian shall get her a loose bodide-gowne,
In tri'mge, how a Gentleman differs from a Clown.

Is that a fortune for a Christian; a Turk, or a Gypsy could not have told
her a worse


Come, I Will stand my self, and once venture the poor head of the Town, do your
worst, my name's Townshead, and heers my hand I Will not be angry


A Cuckold you must be, and that for three lives;

Your own, the Parsons, and your Wives.


I swear I Will never marry for that, an't be but to give fortune my foe the lie;
Com Pan Puppie you must in too


No, I Am well enough, I would ha'no good fortune an I might;


Yet look to your self, you will ha some ill luck,
And shortly, for I have his purse at a pluck.
Away birds Mum,
I hear by the Hum,
If Beck-harman come,
He Will strike us all dumb,
With a noise like a Drum,
Let Us give him our room,
Here, this way some,
And that way others,
We are not all brothers;
Leave me to the cheats,
I Will show 'em some feats.

What! are they gone? flowne all of a sudden? this is fine in faith? a covie
call y'em, they are a covie soon scattered me think, who sprung 'em I marle


Marry your self Puppie for ought I know, you quested last.


Would he had quested first, and sprung y'em an 'owre ago, for me.


Why! what is the matter man?


'Slid, they have sprung my purse, and all I had about me.


They have not, have they?


As I am true Clod, have they, and ransacled me of every penny, outcept I were
with child with an owl (as they say) I never saw such luck, it is enough to
make a man a whore


Hold thy peace, thou talk as if thou had a license to lose thy purse
alone in this company; 'slid here be those can lose a purse in honor of the
Gypsies, as well as thou for thy heart, and never make word of it: I have lost
my purse too


What was there i'thy purse, thou keep'st such a whining; was the lease of thy
house in it


Or thy Grannams silver ring.


No, but a Mill sixe-pence I loved as dearly, and a 2 pence I had to spend
over and above; besides; the Harper that was gathered amongst us, to pay the
Piper


Our whole stock, is that gone? how will Tom Tickle-foot do to wet his
whistle then


Marry, a new collection, there is no music else masters, he can ill pipe that
wants his upper lip; Money


They have robbed me too of a dainty race of ginger, and a jetring I had, to
draw Jacke straw hither a holy days


Is It possible? fine fingered Gypsies in faith.


And I have lost an enchanted Nutmegge, all gilded over, was enchanted at
Oxford for me, to put i'my sweet-hearts Ale a mornings; with a row of
white-pins that prick me to the very heart, the loss of them


And I have lost, besides my purse, my best bride-lace I had at Joane Turners
wedding, and a halpeworth of hobnayles: Francis Addle-breech has lost somewhat
too, besides her Mayden-head


I have lost my thimble, and a skeine of Coventry-blew I had to work Gregory
Lichfield a handkercheife


And I unhappie Christian as I am, have lost my Practice of Piety, with a
bowed groat; and the ballet of Whoope Barnibie, which grieves me ten times
worse


And Tickle-foot h'as lost his cloute he says, with a three pence and four
tokens in it; besides his Tabouring-sticke even now


And I my knife and sheath, and my fine Dogs-leather gloves.


H'a we lost never a dog amongst us, where is Puppie.


Here goodman Townshead, you have nothing to lose it seems, but the
Towne-braines you are trusted with


OH my dear marrowes!
No shooting of arrows,
Or shafts of your wit,
Each other to hit,
In your skirmishing fit?
Your store is but small,
Then venture not all.
Remember each mock,
Does spend of the stock;
And what was here done,
Being under the Moon,
And at afternoon,
Will prove right soon
Disceptio visus,
Done Gratia risus.
There Is no such thing,
As the loss of a ring,
Or what you count worse,
The miss of a purse.
But hay for the maine,
And pass of the strain,
Here Is both come again.
And there is an old twinger,
Can show yet the ginger;
The Pinnes, and the Nutmegge
Are safe here with Slut-megge;
Then strike up your Tabour,
And there is for your labor;
The sheath, and the knife, I Will venture my life,
Shall breed you no strife,
But like man, and wife,
Or Sister, and brother, keep one with another,
And light as a feather,
Make haste to come hither.
THe Coventry-blew,
Hangs there upon Prue,
And here is one opens
The Clout, and the Tokens;
Deny the bowed groat,
And you lie in your throat.
Or the Tabourers nine pence,
Or the six fine pence.
As for the ballet,
Or the book what you call it;
Alas our society,
Mell's not with piety,
Himself has forsook it,
That first undertook it;
For thimble, or bride-lace
Search yonder side less.
All Is to be found,
If you look your selves round;
We scorn to take from ye,
We had rather spend on ye,
If any man wrong ye,
The Theef's among ye.
EXcellent in faith, a most restorative Gypsy, all is here again; and yet by his
learning of Legier-demaine, he would make us believe we had robbed our selves


A Gypsy of quality believe it, and one of the Kings Gypsies; this a
Drinke-alian, or a Drinke-braggatan

Ask him.

The King has his noise of Gypsies, as well as of Bearwards, and other
Minstrells


What sort or order of Gypsies, I pray sir.


A Flagon-fekian,
A Devils-arse-a Pekian;
Borne first at Niglington,
Bred up at Filchington,
Boarded at Tappington,
Bedded at Wappington.
Fore me, a dainty derived Gypsy.


But I pray sir, if a man might ask on you, how came your Captains place
first to be called the Devills-arse


For that take my word,
We have a record,
That does it afford,
And says our first Lord,
Cocklorrell he hight,
On a time did invite
The Devil to a feast;
The tail of the jest,
Though since it be long,
Lives yet in a song;
Which if you would hear,
Shall plainly appear.
I Will call in my Clarke
Shall sing like a Lark,
Come in my long sharke,
With thy face brown and dark;
With thy tricks, and thy toys,
Make a merry merry noise,
To those mad Country boys,
And chant out the fart of the Grand-devils arse.

COck-lorrell, would needs have the Devil his guest,
And bad him once into the Peake to dinner,
Where never the Fiend had such a feast,
Provided him yet at the charge of a sinner.
His stomach was queasie (for coming there Coacht),
The jogging had caused some crudities rise;
To help it he called for a Puritan poacht,
That used to turn up the egg's of his eyes.
And so recovered unto his wish,
He sat him down, and he fell to eat;
Promooter in plum-broth was the first dish,
His own privy kitchen had no such meat.
Yet though with this he much were taken
Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher
As soon as he spied the Bawd, and bacon,
By which you may note the devill's a wencher.
Six pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
Sempsters, Tyrewomen, fit for his pallat;
With Feathermen, and perfumes put,
Some twelve in a Charger to make a grand sallet:
A rich fat Usurer stu'd in his marrow,
And by him a Lawyers head and green-sawce;
Both which his belly took in like a barrow,
As if till then he had never seen sauce.
Then Carbonadoed, and Cook't with pains,
Was brought up a cloven Serjants face;
The sauce was made of his Yeamans brains,
That had been beaten out with his own mace.
Two roasted Sheriffs came whole to the board;
(The feast had nothing been without 'em)
Both living, and dead, they were foxt, and fu'rd,
Their chains like sawsages hung about 'em.
The very next dish, was the Mayor of a Town,
With a pudding of maintenance thrust in his belly;
Like a Goose in the feathers dressed in his gown,
And his couple of Hinch-boyes boyld to a jelly.
A London Cuckold, hot from the spit,
And when the Carver up had broke him;
The Devil chopped up his head at a bit,
But the horns were very near like to have choakt him.
The chine of a Lecher too there was roasted,
With a plumpe Harlots haunch and garlic;
A Panders pettitoes that had boasted
Himself for a Captain, yet never was warlicke.
A large fat pastie of a Midwife hot;
And for a cold baked meat into the story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought,
And coffined in crust, till now she was hoary.
To these, an over-growne-justice of peace,
With a Clarke like a gizzard thrust under each arm;
And warrants for sippets, laid in his own grease,
Set over a chaffing dish to be kept warm.
The joule of a Jailer, served for fish,
A Constable sous'd with vinegar by;
Two Aldermen lobsters asleep in a dish,
A Deputy tart, a Churchwarden pie.
All which devovr'd; He then for a close,
Did for a full draught of Derby call;
He heaved the huge vessel up to his nose,
And left not till he had drunk up all.
Then from the table he gave a start,
Where banquet, and wine were nothing scarce;
All which he slirted away with a fart,
From whence it was called the Devils Arse.
And there he made such a breach with the wind,
The hole too standing open the while,
That the sent of the vapor, before, and behind,
Has foully perfumed most part of the Isle.
And this was Tobacco, the learned suppose;
Which since in Country, Court, and Town,
In the Devils glister-pipe smoaks at the nose
Of Polle at, and Madam, of Gallant, and Clown.
From which wicked weed, with Swines-flesh, and Ling;
Or any thing else that's feast for the Fiend:
Our Captain, and we, cry God save the King,
And send him good meat, and mirth without end.
AN excellent song, and a sweet Songster, and would have done rarely in a Cage,
with a dish of water, and hempseed; a fine breast of his own: Sir you are a
Prelate of the Order, I understand, and I have a terrible grudging now upon me
to be one of your company; will your Captain take a Prentise Sir? I would
bind my self to him body and soul, either for one and twenty years, or as
many lives as he would


I, and put in my life for one, for I am come about too; I am sorry I had no
more money in my purse when you came first upon us Sir; If I had known you
would have picked my pocket so like a Gentleman, I would have been better
provided; I shall be glad to venture a purse with your Worship at any time
you will appoint, so you would prefer me to your Captain; I Will put in security
for my truth, and serve out my time, though I dye to morrow


I, upon those terms Sir, and in hope your Captain keeps better cheer then
he made the Devil, for my stomach will nere agree with that diet, we will be
all his followers; I Will go home and fetch a little money Sir, all I have, and
you shall pick my pocket to my face, and i will avouch it; A man would not
desire to have his pocket picked in better company


Tut, they have other manner of gifts then picking of pockets, or telling
fortunes; if they would but please to show 'em, or thought us poor Country
mortals worthy of them; what might a man do to be a Gentleman of your company
Sir

I, a Gypsy in ordinary, or nothing.


Friends not to refell ye,
Or any way quell ye,
To buy or to sell ye,
I only must tell ye;
Ye aim at a mystery,
Worthy a History;
There Is much to be done,
E're you can be a Son,
Or brother of the Moon.
It Is not so soon
Acquired, as desired.
You must be Ben-bowsie,
And sleepy, and drowsy,
And lasie, and lousy,
Before ye can rowse ye,
In shape that arowse ye.
And then you may stalk
The Gypsies walk;
To the Coopes, and the Pens,
And bring in the Hens,
Though the Cock be sullen
For loss of the Pullen:
Take Turkey, or Capon,
And Gammons of Bacon,
Let naught be forsaken;
We Will let you go loose,
Like a Fox to a Goose,
And show you the stie
Where the little Pigs lie;
Whence if you can take
One or two, and not wake
The Sow in her dreams,
But by the Moon beams;
So warily hye,
As neither do cry.
You shall the next day
Have license to play
At the hedge a flirt,
For a sheet, or a shirt;
If your hand be light,
I Will show you the slight
Of our Ptolomies knot,
It is, and it is not,
To change your complexion,
With the noble confection
Of Wall-nuts, and Hog's Grease,
Better then Dogs-grease:
And to milk the Kine,
Ere the Milke-mayd fine
Has opened her eine.
Or if you desire
To spit, or fart fire,
I Will teach you the knacks,
Of eating of flax;
And out of their noses,
Draw Ribbands, and posies,
As for example,
Mine own is as ample,
And fruitful a nose,
As a wit can suppose;
Yet it shall go hard,
But there will be spared,
Each of you a yard,
And worth your regard.
When they color, and size
Arrive at your eyes.
And if you incline
To a cup of good wine,
When you suppe, or dine;
If you chance it to lack,
Be it Clarret, or Sack;
I Will make this snout,
To deal it about,
Or this to run out,
As it were from a spout.

Admirable tricks, and he does 'em all se defendendo, as if he would not be
taken in the trappe of authority, by a frail fleshly Constable


Without the aid of a Cheese,


Or help of a flitch of bacon.


Oh, he would chirp in a pair of stocks sumptuously; I Would give any thing to
see him play loose with his hands, when his feet were fast


OF my conscience he fears not that, and the Marshall himself were here; I
protest I admire him


IS this worth your wonder,
Nay then you shall under-
Stand more of my skill.
I can (for I will)
Here at Burley o'th Hill,
Give you all your fill,
Each Jacke with his Gill,
And show you the King,
The Prince too and bring;
The Gypsies were here,
Like Lords to appear,
With such there attenders,
As you thought offenders,
Who now become new men,
You Will know them for true men;
For he we call chief,
I Will tell 't ye in breife,
Is so far from a theife,
As he gives ye releife
With his bread, bear, and beife
And it is not long since
Ye drank of his Wine,
And it made you fine;
Both Clarret, and Sherrie,
Then let us be merry;
And help with your call,
For a Hall, a Hall.
Stand up to the wall,
Both good men, and tall,
We are one man's all.

THe fist of August,
Will not let saw-dust
Lie in your throats,
Or cobwebs, or Oats;
But help to scour ye.
This is no Gowrie,
Has drawn James hither,
But the goodman of Bever,
Our Buckinghams Father;
Then so much the rather
Make it a jolly night,
For it is a holy night,
Spite of the Constable,
Or Mas Deane of Dunstable.

A Hall, a hall, a hall.

WHy now ye behold,
It Was truth that I told,
And no devise;
They are changed in a trice,
And so will I,
Be my self, by and by.
I only now
Must study now
To come off with a grace,
With my Patrico's place:
Some short kind of blessing,
It self addressing
Unto my good Master,
Which light on him faster,
Then wishes can fly.
And you that stand by
Be as jocund as I;
Each man with his voice,
Give his heart to rejoice,
Which I Will requite,
If my Art hit right,
Though late now at night,
Each Clown here in sight,
Before day light,
Shall prove a good Knight;
And your Lasses Pages
Worthy their wages,
Where fancy engages
Girls to their ages.

Oh any thing for the Patrico, what is it? what is it?

Nothing, but bear the bob of the close,
It will be no bruthen you well may suppose.
But bless the Sov'raine, and his senses,
An to wish away offenses,

Let us alone, bless the Sov'raine, and his senses.

We Will take them in order, as they have being,
And first of seeing.

FRom a Gypsy, in the morning,
Or a pair of squint-eyes turning:
From the Coblin, and the spectre,
Or a Drunkard, though with Nectar;
From a woman true to no man,
Which is ougly, besides common;
A smock rampant, and the itches,
To be putting on the breeches:
Where so 'ere they have their being,
Bless the Sov'raine, and his seeing.
FRom a fool, and serious ^oyes;
From a Lawyer, three parts noise;
From impertinence, like a Drum
Beat at dinner in his room;
From a tongue without a file,
Heaps of Phrases, and no style.
From a Fiddle out of tune,
As the Cuckoo is in June.
From the candlesticks of Lothbury,
And the loud pure wives of Banbury:
Or a long pretended fit;
Meant for mirth, but is not it:
Only time, and ears out-wearing,
Bless the Sov'raine, and his hearing.
FRom a strolling Tinkers sheet,
Or a pair of Carriers feet:
From a Lady that does breath,
Worse above, then underneath.
From the Diet, and the knowledge
Of the students in Beares-colledge.
From Tobacco, with the tipe
Of the Devils glister-pipe;
Or a stincke all stincks excelling,
A Fishmongers dwelling,
Bless the Sov'raigne, and his smelling.
FRom an Oyster, and fried fish
A Sowes babye in a dish:
From any portion of a Swine,
From bad Venison, and worse wine.
Ling, what Cook so'ere it boil,
Though with mustard fawc'd and oil,
Or what else would keep man fasting,
Bless the Sov'raigne, and his tasting.
BOth from birdlime, and from pitch,
From a Doxie, and her itch.
From the brisles of a Hog,
Or the ring-worme in a Dog.
From the courtshippe of a brier,
Or St. Anthonies old fire.
From a needle, or a thorn;
In The bed at Even, or Morn.
Or from any Gowtes least grutching.
Bless the Sov'raigne, and his touching.
Bless him too from all offenses,
In his sports, as in his fences.
From a Boy to cross his way,
From a fall, or a foul day.
Bless him, o bless him Heaven, and lend him long
to be the sacred burden of all song;
The Acts, and years, of all our Kings to out go;
And while he is mortal, we not think him so.

THe sports are done, yet do not let
Your joys in sudden silence set;
Delight, and dumbness never met
In one self subject yet.
If things opposed must mixed appear,
Then add a boldness to your fear,
And speak a hymn to him,
Where all your duties do of right belong,
Which I will sweeten with an under song.
GLory of ours, and grace of all the Eath;
How well your figure does become your birth,
As if your form, and fortune equal stood,
And only virtue got above your blood.

Virtue; his Kingly virtue which did merit
This Isle entire, and you are to inherit.
HOw right he does confess him in his face,
His browe, his eye, and every mark of State;
As if he were the issue of each Grace,
And bore about him both his fame, and fate.

Look, look, is he not fair,
And fresh, fragrant too
As Summer sky, or purged Air,
And looks as Lillies do,
That were this morning blown.
Oh more! that more of him were known.

Look how the Winds upon the Waves grown tame,
Take up Land sounds upon their purple wings;
And catching each from other, bear the fame
To every angle of their sacred springs.
So will we take his praise, and hurl his name
About the Globe, in thousand Ay'ry rings,
If his great virtue be in lore with fame,
For that contem'd, both are neglected things.

GOod Princes soar above their fame,
And in their worth,
Come greater forth,
Then in their name.
Such, such the Father is,
Whom every title strives to kiss;
Who on his Royal grounds unto himself does raise,
The work to trouble fame, and to astonish praise.
INdeed he is not Lord alone of all the State,
But of the love of men, and of the Empires fate.
The Muses Arts, the Schools commerce, our honors laws,
And Virtues hang on him, as on their working cause.

His Hand-mayd Justice is,

Wisdom, his Wife;

His Mistress, Mercy;

Temperance, his life.

His Pages bounty, and grace which many prove,

His Guards are Magnanimity, and love.

His Ushers, Council, Truth, and Piety,

And all that follows him, Felicity.

OH that we understood
Our good;
There Is happiness indeed in blood,
And store,
But how much more,
When vertu's flood
In the same stream does hit?
As that grows high with years, so happiness with it.
LOve, love his fortune then, and virtues known,
Who is the top of men,
But makes the happiness our own;
Since where the Prince, for goodness is renownd,
The Subject with Felicity is Crowned.

AT Burley, Bever, and now last at Windsor,
Which shows we are Gypsies of no common kind Sir.
You have behold (and with delight) their change,
And how they came transformed, may think it strange.
It being a thing not touched at by our Poet,
Good Ben slept there, or else forgot to show it;
But least it prove like wonder to the sight,
To see a Gypsy, as an Aethiope, white.
Know, that what died our faces, was an ointment
Made, and laid on by Mr. Woolfes appointment,
The Court Licanthropos; yet without spells,
By a mere Barber, and no Magic else:
It was fetched off with water, and a ball,
And to our transformation, this is all,
Save what the Master Fashioner calls his,
For to Gypsies Metamorphosis;
Who does disguise his habit, and his face,
And takes on a false person by his place:
The power of Poetry can never fail her;
Assisted by a Barber, and a Tailor.

