THE STAPLE OF NEWS.

A COMEDY ACTED IN THE YEAR, 1625.

BY HIS MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

The Author BEN: IONSON.

Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare poetae:
Aut simul and iucunda, and idonea dicere vitae


LONDON, Printed by I. B. for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Bear, in Paul's Churchyard. 1631

The SCENE. London.

FOr your own sake, not ours --


Come Gossip, be not ashamed. The Play is the Staple of News, and you are the
Mistress, and Lady of Tatle, let us have your opinion of it: Do you hear
Gentleman? what are you? Gentleman-usher to the Play? pray you help us to some
stools here


Where? of the Stage, Ladies?


Yes, of the Stage; we are persons of quality, I assure you, and women of
fashion; and come to see, and to be seen: My Gossip Tatle here, and Gossip
Expectation, and my Gossip Censure, and I am Mirth, the daughter of Christmas,
and spirit of Shrouetide. They say, It Is merry when Gossips meet, I hope your
Play will be a merry one


Or you will make it such, Ladies. Bring a form here, but what will the
Noblemen think, or the grave Wits here, to see you seated on the bench thus


Why, what should they think? but that they had Mothers, as we had, and those
Mothers had Gossips (if their children were christened) as we are, and such as
had a longing to see Plays, and sit upon them, as we do, and arraigne both
them, and their Poets


O! Is that your purpose? Why, Mrs. Mirth, and Madame Tatle, enjoy your
delights freely


Look your News be new, and fresh, Mr. Prologue, and untainted, I shall find
them else, if they be stale, or flye-blowne, quickly


We ask no favor from you, only we would entreat of Madame Expectation --


What, Mr. Prologue?


That your Ladi-ship would expect no more then you understand.


Sir, I can expect enough!


I fear too much, Lady, and teach others to do the like?


I can do that too, if I have cause.


Cry you mercy, you never did wrong, but with just cause. What Is this, Lady?


Curiosity, my Lady Censure.


O Curiosity! you come to see, who wears the new suit to day? whose clothes
are best penned, what ever the part be? which Actor has the best leg and
foot? what King plays without cuffes? and his Queen without gloves? who
rides post in stockings? and daunces in boots


Yes, and which amorous Prince makes love in drink, or does ouer-act
prodigiously in beaten satin* and, having got the trick on it, will be
monstrous still, in despite of Counsel


Master Prologue, begin.


Ay me!


Who Is that?


Nay, start not Ladies, these carry no fire-workes to fright you, but a Torch
in their hands, to give light to the business. The truth is, there are a set
of gamesters within, in travel of a thing called a Play, and would feign be
delivered of it: and they have entreated me to be their Man- Midwife, the
Prologue; for they are like to have a hard labor on it


Then the Poet has abused himself, like an Ass, as he is.


No, his Actors will abuse him enough, or I am deceived. Yonder he is within (I
was in the Tiring-house a while to see the Actors dressed) rolling himself up
and down like a tun, in the midst of 'hem, and spurges, never did vessel of
wort, or wine work so! His sweating put me in mind of a good Shrouing dish
(and I believe would be taken up for a service of state somewhere, an't were
known) a stewed Poet! He does sit like an vnbrac'd Drum with one of his heads
beaten out: For, that you must note, a Poet has two heads, as a Drum has, one
for making, the other repeating, and his repeating head is all to pieces: they
may gather it up in the tiring-house; for he has torn the book in a
Poetical fury, and put himself to silence in dead Sack, which, were there no
other vexation, were sufficient to make him the most miserable Emblem of
patience


The Prologue, peace.


FOr your own sakes, not his, he bad me say,
Would you were come to hear, not see a Play.
Though we his Actors must provide for those,
Who are our guests, here, in the way of shows,
The maker has not so; he would have you wise,
Much rather by your ears, then by your eyes:
And prays you will not preiudge his Play for ill,
Because you mark it not, and sit not still;
But have a longing to salute, or talk
With such a female, and from her to walk
With your discourse, to what is done, and where,
How, and by whom, in all the town; but here.
Alas! what is it to his Scene, to know
How many Coaches in Hide-parke did show
Last spring, what fare to day at Medleyes was,
If Dunstan, or the Phoenix best wine has?
They are things -- But yet, the Stage might stand as well,
If it did neither hear these things, nor tell.
Great noble wits, be good unto your selves,
And make a difference 'twixt Poetique elues,
And Poets: All that dable in the ink,
And defile quills, are not those few, can think,
Conceive, express, and steer the souls of men,
As with a rudder, round thus, with their pen.
He must be one that can instruct your youth,
And keep your Acme in the state of truth,
Must enterprise this work, mark but his ways,
What flight he makes, how new; And then he says,
If that not like you, that he sends to night,
It Is you have left to judge, not he to write.
A Work not smelling of the Lamp, to night,
But fitted for your Majesty's disport,
And writ to the Meridian of your Court,
We bring; and hope it may produce delight:
The rather, being offered, as a Rite
To Scholars, that can judge, and fair report
The sense they hear, above the vulgar sort
Of Nut-crackers, that only come for sight.
Wherein, although our Title, Sir, be News.
We yet adventure, here, to tell you none;
But show you common follies, and so known,
That though they are not truths, the innocent Muse
Has made so like, as Phant'sie could them state,
Or Poetry, without scandal, imitate.
GRamercie Letherleg: Get me the Spurrier,
And thou have fitted me.

I Will do it presently.

Look to me, wit, and look to my wit, Land,
That is, look on me, and with all thine eyes,
Male, Female, yea, Hermaphroditicke eyes,
And those bring all your helps, and perspicills,
To see me at best advantage, and augment
My form as I come forth, for I do feel
I will be one, worth looking after, shortly.
Now, by and by, that is shortly.
Three, four, five, six. Enough, enough, dear watch,
Thy pulse has beat enough. Now sleep, and rest;
Would thou could make the time to do so too:
I Will wind thee up no more. The hour is come
So long expected! There, there,
My pupil age, and vassalage together.
And Liberty, come throw thy self about me,
In a rich suite, cloak, hat, and band, for now
I Will sue out no man's Livery, but miny own,
I stand on my own feet, so much a year,
Right, round, and sound, the Lord of mine own ground,
And (to ryme to it) threescore thousand Pound!

Worse then the same thou prosecut'st, and prick'st
In subtle seame -- (Go too, I say no more)
Thus to retard my longings: on the day
I do write man, to beat thee. One and twenty,
Since the clock struck, complete! and thou will feel it
Thou foolish Animal! I could pity him,
(An' I were not heartily angry with him now)
For this one piece of folly he bears about him,
To dare to tempt the Fury of an heir,
TO above two thousand a year; yet hope his custom!
Well, Mr. Fashioner, there is some must break --
A head, for this your breaking. Are you come, Sir,

GOd give your worship joy.

What? of your staying?
And leaving me to stalk here in my trowses,
Like a tame Her'n-few for you?

I but waited
Below, till the clock struck.

Why, if you had come
Before a quarter, would it so have hurt you,
In reputation, to have waited here?

No, but your worship might have pleaded nonage,
If you had got 'hem on, ere I could make
Just Affidauit of the time.

That jest
Has gained thy pardon, thou had lived, condemned
To thine own hell else, never to have wrought
Stitch more for me, or any Peniboy,
I could have hindered thee: but now thou art mine.
For one and twenty years, or for three lives,
Choose which thou will, I Will make thee a Copyholder,
Bill vnquestion'd. Help me on.

Presently, Sir, I am bound unto your worship.

Thou shall be, when I have sealed thee a Lease of my Custom.

Your worps. Barbar is without.

Who? Thom?
Come in Thom: set thy things upon the Board
And spread thy clothes, lay all forth in procinctu,
And tell's what news?

O Sir, a staple of news!
Or the New Staple, which you please.

What Is that?

An Office, Sir, a brave young Office set up.
I had forgot to tell your worship.

For what?

To enter all the News, Sir, of the time,

And vent it as occasion serves! A place
Of huge commerce it will be!

Pray thee peace,
I cannot abide a talking Tailor: let Thom
(He Is a Barber) by his place relate it,
What is it, an Office, Thom?

Newly erected
Here in the house, almost on the same floor,
Where all the news of all sorts shall be brought,
And there be examined, and then registered,
And so be issued under the Seal of the Office,
As Staple News; no other news be current.

Before me, thou speak of a brave business, Thom.

Nay, if you knew the brain that hatched it Sr --

I know thee well enough: give him a loaf, Thom --
Quiet his mouth, that Oven will be venting else.
Proceed --

He tells you true Sr. Mr Cymbal,
Is Master of the Office, he proiected it,
He lies here in the house: and the great rooms
He has taken for the Office, and set up
His Deskes and Classes, Tables and his Shelues,

He Is my Customer, and a Wit Sir, too.
But, h'has brave wits under him --

Yes, four Emissaries,

Emissaries? stay, there is a fine new word, Thom!
'Pray God it signify any thing, what are Emissaries?

Men employed outward, that are sent abroad
To fetch in the commodity.

From all regions
Where the best news are made.

Or vented forth.

By way of exchange, or trade.

Nay, thou will speak --

My share Sr. there is enough for both.

Go on then,
Speak all thou can: me thinks, the ordinaries
Should help them much.

Sir, they have ordinaries,
And extraordinaries, as many changes,
And variations, as there are points in the compass.

But the 4. Cardinal Quarters --

I, those Thom --

The Court, Sir, Paul's, Exchange, and Westminster Hall.

Who is the Chief? which has preceedencie?

The governor of the Staple, Master Cymball.
He is the Chief; and after him the Emissaries:
First Emissary Court, one Master Fitton,
He Is a Ieerer too.

What Is that?

A Wit.

Or half a Wit, some of them are Halfe-wits,
Two to a Wit, there are a set of 'hem.
Then Master Ambler, Emissary Paul's,
A fine paced gentleman, as you shall see, walk
The middle I Will: And then my Froy Hans Buz,
A Dutchman; he is Emissary Exhange.

I had thought Mr. Burst the Merchant had had it.

No,
He has a rupture, he has sprung a leake,
Emissarie Westminster's vndispos'd of yet;
Then the Examiner, Register, and two Clerks,
They manage all at home, and sort, and file,
And seal the news, and issue them.

Thom, dear Thom.
What may my means do for thee, ask, and have it,
I Would feign be doing some good. It is my birthday.
And I Would do it betimes, I feel a grudging
Of bounty, and I would not long lie fallow.
I pray thee think, and speak, or wish for something.

I would I had but one of the Clerks places,
I'this News Office,.

Thou shall have it, Thom,
If silver, or gold will fetch it; what is the rate?
At what is it set in the Market?

Fifty pound, Sir.

An't were a hundred, Thom, thou shall not want it.



How now Aesops Ass!
Because I play with Thom, must I needs run
Into your rude embraces? stand you still, Sir;
Clownes fawnings, are a horses salutations.
How do thou like my suite, Thom?

Mr Fashioner
Has hit your measures, Sir, h'has molded you,
And made you, as they say.

No, no, not I,
I am an Ass, old Aesops Ass.

Nay, Fashioner,
I can do thee a good turn too, be not musty,
Though thou have molded me, as little Thom says,


As good,
Right Spanish perfume, the Lady Estifania's,
They cost twelve pound a pair.

Thy bill will say so.
I pray thee tell me, Fashioner, what Authors
Thou read'st to help thy invention? Italian prints?
Or Arras hangings? They are Tailors Libraries.

I scorn such helps.

O, though thou art a silk-worme!
And deal'st in sattins and veluets, and rich plushes,
Thou can not spin all forms out of thy self;
They are quite other things: I think this suite
Has made me wittier, then I was.

Believe it Sir,
That clothes do much upon the wit, as weather
Does on the brain; and thence comes your proverb;
The Tailor makes the man: I speak by experience
Of my own Customers. I have had Gallants,
Both Court and Country, would have fooled you up
In a new suite, with the best wits, in being,
And kept their speed, as long as their clothes lasted
Han'some, and neat; but then as they grew out
At the elbowes again, or had a stain, or spot,
They have sunk most wretchedly.

What thou reportst,
Is but the common calamity, and seen daily;
And therefore you 'haue another answering proverb:
A broken sleeue keeps the arm back,

It Is true, Sir.
And thence we say, that such a one plays at peepe-arme.

Do you so? it is wittily said. I wonder, Gentlemen,
And men of means will not maintain themselves
Fresher in wit, I mean in clothes, to the highest.
For he that is out of clothes, is out o'fashion,
And out of fashion, is out of countenance,
And out of countenance, is out of Wit.
Is not Rogue Haberdasher come?

Yes, here, Sir.
I have been without this half hour.

Give me my hat.
Put on my Girdle. Rascal, sits my Ruff well?

In print.

Slave.

See your self.

Is this same hat
Of The block passant? Do not answer me,
I cannot stay for an answer. I do feel
The powers of one and twenty, like a Tide
Flow in upon me, and perceive an Heir,
Can Conjure up all spirits in all circles,
Rogue, Rascal, Slave, give tradesmen their true names,
And they appear to 'hem presently.

For profit.

Come, cast my cloak about me, I Will go see,
This Office Thom, and be trimmed afterward.
I Will put thee in possession, my prime work!
Gods so: my Spurrier! put 'hem on boy, quickly,
I'had like to ha lost my Spurs with too much speed.

Good morning to my Joy, My jolly Peni-boy!
The Lord, and the Prince of plenty!
I come to see what riches, Thou bear in thy breeches,
The first of thy one and twenty:
What, do thy pockets gingle? Or shall we need to mingle
Our strength both of foot, and horses!
These fellows look so eager, As if they would beleaguer
An Heir in the midst of his forces!
I hope they be no Serieants! That hang upon thy margents.
This Rogue has the Ioule of a Iaylor!

O Founder, no such matter, My Spurrier, and my Hatter,
My Linen man, and my Tailor.
Thou should have been brought in too, Shoemaker,
If the time had been longer, and Thom Barber.
How do thou like my company, old Canter?
Do I not muster a brave troop? all Bill-men?
Present your Arms, before my Founder here,
This is my Founder, this same learned Canter!
He brought me the first news of my fathers death,
Founder,
Worship him, boys, I Will read only the sums.
And pass 'hem straight.

Now Ale.

And strong Ale bless him.

Gods so, some Ale, and Sugar for my Founder!
Good Bills, sufficient Bills, these Bills may pass.

I do not like those paper-squibs, good Master.
They may undo your store, I mean, of Credit,
And fire your Arsenall, if case you do not
In time make good those outerworkes, your pockets,
And take a Garrison in of some two hundred,
To beat these Pyoners off, that carry a Mine
Would blow you up, at last. Secure your Casamates,
Here Master Picklocke, Sir, your man of Law,
And learned Attorney, has sent you a Bag of munition.

What is it?

Three hundred pieces.

I Will dispatch 'hem.

Do, I would have your strengths lined, and perfumed
With Gold, as well as Amber.

God a mercy,
Come, Ad soluendum, boys! there, there, and there, etc.
Totalis.

See!
The difference 'twixt the covetous, and the prodigal!
"The Covetous man never has money! and
"The Prodigal will have none shortly!

Ha,
What says my Founder? I thank you, I thank you Sirs.

God bless your worship, and your worships Chanter.

I say 't is nobly done, to cherish Shopkeepers,
And pay their Bills, without examining thus.

Alas! they have had a pitiful hard time on it,
A long vacation, from their coozening.
Poor Rascals, I do do it out of charity.
I would advance their trade again, and have them
Haste to be rich, swear, and forswear wealthily,
What do you stay for, Sirrah?

To my box Sir,

Your box, why, there is an angel, if my Spurs
Rippon.

Give me never a penny
If I strike not through your bounty with the Rowells.

Do thou want any money Founder?

Who, Sr. I,
Did I not tell you I was bred in the Mines,
Under Sir Beuis Bullion.

That is true,
I quite forgot, you Myne-men want no money,
Your streets are pau'd with 't: there, the molten silver
Runns out like cream, on cakes of gold.

And Rubies
Do grow like Strawberries.

'Twere brave being there!
Come Thom, we'll go to the Office now.

What Office?

News Office, the New Staple; thou shall go too,
It Is here in the house, on the same floor, Thom. says,
Come, Founder, let us trade in Ale, and nutmegges.

WHat, are those Desks fit now? set forth the Table,
The Carpet and the Chair: where are the News
That were examined last? have you filled them up?

Not yet, I had no time.

Are those news registered,
That Emissary Buz sent in last night?
Of Spinola, and his Eggs?

Yes Sir, and filled.

What are you now upon?

That our new Emissary
Westminster, gave us, of the Golden Heir.

Dispatch, that is news indeed, and of importance.
What would you have good woman?

I would have Sir,
A groatsworth of any News, I care not what,
To carry down this Saturday, to our Vicar.

O! You are a Butterwoman, ask Nathaniel
The Clerk, there.

Sir, I tell her, she must stay
Till Emissary Exchange, or Paul's send in,
And then I Will fit her.

Do good woman, have patience,
It is not now, as when the Captain lived.

You Will blast the reputation of the Office,
Now in the Bud, if you dispatch these Groats,
So soon: let them attend in name of policy.

IN troth they are dainty rooms; what place is this?

This is the outer room, where my Clerks sit,
And keep their sides, the Register in the midst,
The Examiner, he sits private there, within,
And here I have my several Rowles, and Fyles
Of News by the Alphabet, and all put up
Under their heads.

But those, too, subdivided?

Into Authentical, and Apocryphal.

Or News of doubtful credit, as Barbers news.

And Tailors News, Porters, and Watermens news,

Whereto, beside the Coranti, and Gazetti.

I have the News of the season.

As vacation news,
Terme-nerves, and Christmas-newes.

And news OF the faction.

As the Reformed news, Protestant news,

And Pontificiall news, of all which several,
The Day-bookes, Characters, Precedents are kept.
Together with the names of special friends --

And men of Correspondence in the Country --

Yes, of all ranks, and all Religions. --

Factors, and Agents --

Liegers, that lie out
Through all the Shires of the kingdom.

This is fine!
And bears a brave relation! but what says
Mercurius Britannicus to this?

O Sir, he gains by it half in half.

Nay more
I Will stand to it. For, where he was wont to get
In, hungry Captains, obscure Statesmen.

Fellows
To drink with him in a dark room in a Tavern,
And eat a Sawsage.

We have seen't,

As feign,
To keep so many politic pens
Going, to feed the press.

And dish our news,
Were It true, or false.

Now all that charge is saved
The public Chronicler.

How, do you call him there?

And gentle Reader.

He that has the maidenhead
Of all the books.

Yes, dedicated to him,

Or rather prostituted.

You are right, Sir.

No more shall be abused, nor country- Parsons
OF the Inquisition, nor busy Justices,
Trouble the peace, and both torment themselves,
And their poor ign'rant Neighbors with enquiries
After the many, and most innocent Monsters,
That never came in the Counties they were charged with.

Why, me thinks Sir, if the honest common people
Will be abused, why should not they have their pleasure,
In the believing Lies, are made for them;
As you in the Office, making them your selves?

O Sir! it is the printing we oppose.

We not forbid that any News, be made,
But that 't be printed; for when News is printed,
It leaves Sir to be News. while it is but written --

Though it be never so false, it runs News still.

See diverse men's opinions! unto some,
The very printing of them, makes them News;
That have not the heart to believe any thing,
But what they see in print.

I, that is an Error
Has abused many; but we shall reform it,
As many things beside (we have a hope)
Are crept among the popular abuses.

Nor shall the Stationer cheat upon the Time,
By buttering over again --

once, in Seven Years,
As the age doates --

And grows forgetful o'them,
His antiquated Pamphlets, with new dates.
But all shall come from the Mint.

Fresh and new stamped,

With the Office-Seale, Staple Commodity.

And if a man will assure his News, he may:
Twopence a Sheet he shall be warranted,
And have a policy for it.

Sir, I admire
The method of your place; all things within't
Are so digested, fitted, and composed,
As it shows Wit had married Order.

Sir.

The best we could to inuit the Times.

It has
Cost sweat, and freesing.

And some broken sleeps
Before it came to this.

I easily think it.

But now it has the shape --

And is come forth.

A most polite neat thing! with all the limbs,
As sense can taste!

It is Sir, though I say it,
As well-begotten a business, and as fairly
Helped to the World.

You must be a Midwife Sir!
Or else the son of a Midwife! (pray you pardon me)
Have helped it forth so happily! what News have you?
News of this morning? I would feign hear some
Fresh, from the forge (as new as day, as they say.)

And such we have Sir.

Show him the last Roll,
Of Emissary West-minster's, The Heir.

Come nearer, Thom:

There is a brave young Heir
Peny-boy.

That Is I!

His Father died on this day seuenth-night.

True!

At six of the Clock in the morning, just a week
One and Twenty.

I am here, Thom!
Proceed, I pray thee.

An old Canting Beggar
Brought him first News, whom he has entertained,


Why, you shall see him! Founder,
Come in; no Follower, but Companion,
I pray thee put him in, Friend. There Is an Angel --
Thou do not know, he is a wise old Fellow,
Though he seem patched thus, and made up of pieces.
Founder, we are in, here, in, in the Newes-Office!
In this days Roll, already! I do muse
How you came by us Sir's!

One Master Pick-locke
A Lawyer, that has purchased here a place,
This morning, of an Emissary under me.

Emissarie Westminster.

Gave it into the Office,

For his Essay, his piece.

My man of Law!
He Is my Attorney, and Sollicitour too!
A fine pragmaticke! what is his place worth?

A Nemo-scit, Sir.

It Is as News come, in,

And as they are issued. I have the just meoytie
For my part: then the other moeytie
Is parted into seven. The four Emissaries;
Whereof my Cozen Fitton here is for Court,
Ambler for Paul's, and Buz for the Exchange,
Picklocke, for Westminster, with the Examiner,
And Register, they have full parts: and then one part
Is vnder-parted to a couple of Clerks;
And there is the just division of the profits!

Have you those Clarks Sir.

There is one Desk empty,
But it has many Suitors.

Sir, may I
Present one more and carry it, if his parts
Or Gifts, (which you will, call'hem)

Be sufficient Sir.

What are your present Clerks habilities?
How is he qualified?

A decayed Stationer
He was, but knows News well, can sort and rank 'hem.

And for a need can make 'hem.

True Paul's bred,
In The Churchyard.

And this at the West-dore,
O'th other side, he is my Barber Thom,
A pretty Scholar, and a Master of Arts,
Was made, or went out Master of Arts in a throng,
At the University; as before, one Christmas,
He got into a Masque at Court, by his wit,
And the good means of his Cythern, holding up thus
For one of the Music, He Is a nimble Fellow*
And alike skilled in every liberal Science,
As having certain snaps of all, a neat,
Quick-vaine, in forging News too. I do love him,
And promised him a good turn, and I would do it.
What Is your price? the value?

Fifty pounds, Sr.

Get in Thom, take possession, I install thee;
Here, tell your money; give thee joy, good Thom;
And let me hear from thee every minute of News,
While the New Staple stands, or the Office lasts,
Which I do wish, may never be less for thy sake.

The Emissaries, Sir, would speak with you,
And Master Fitton, they have brought in News,
Three Bale together.

Sr, you are welcome, here.

So is your creature.

Business calls us off, Sir,
That may concern the Office.

Keep me fair, Sir,
Still in your Staple, I am here your friend,
On the same flooer.

We shall be your servants.

How do thou like it, Founder?

All is well,
But that your man of law me thinks appears not
In his due time. O! Here comes Masters worship.

HOw does the Heir, bright Master Peniboy?
Is he awake yet in his One and Twenty?
Why, this is better far, then to wear Cypress,
Dull smutting gloves, or melancholy blacks,
And have a pair of twelue-peny broad ribbands
Laid out like Labells.

I should have made shift
To have laughed as heartily in my mourners hood,
As in this Suite, if it had pleased my father
To have been buried, with the Trumpeters.

The Heralds of Arms, you mean.

I mean,
All noise, that is superfluous!

All that idle pomp,
And vanity of a Tombe-stone, your wise father
Did, by his will, prevent. Your worship had --

A loving and obedient father of him,
I know it: a right, kinde-natur'd man,
To dye so opportunely.

And to settle
All things so well, compounded for your ward ship
The week before, and left your state entyre
Without any charge upon it.

I must needs say,
I lost an Officer of him, a good Bayliffe,
And I shall want him; but all peace be with him,
I will not wish him alive, again; not I,
For all my Fortune; give your worship joy
O'your new place, your Emissary-ship,
In The News Office.

Know you, why I bought it Sr?

Not I.

To work for you, and carry a mine
Against the Master of it, Master Cymball;
Who has a plot upon a Gentlewoman,
Was once designed for you, Sir.

Me?

Your father,
Old Master Peni-boy, of happy memory,
And wisdom too, as any in the County,
Careful to find out a fit match for you,
In his own life time (but he was prevented)
Left it in writing in a Schedule here,
To be annexed to his Will; that you,
His only Son, upon his charge, and blessing,
Should take due notice of a Gentlewoman,
Soiourning with your uncle, Rieher Peni-boy.

A Cornish Gentlewoman, I do know her,
Mistress, Pecunia doe-all.

A great Lady,
Indeed she is, and not of mortal race,
Infanta of the Mines; her Graces Grandfather,
Was Duke, and Cousin to the King of Ophyr,
The Subterranean, let that pass. Her name is,
Or rather, her three names are (for such she is)
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, A great Princess,
Of mighty power, though she live in private
With a contracted family! Her Secretary --

Who is her Gentleman-usher too.

One Broker,
And then two Gentlewomen; Mistress Statute,
And Mistress Band, with Wax the Chambermaide,
And Mother Mortgage, the old Nurse, two Grooms,
Pawn, and his fellow; you have not many to bribe, Sir.
The work is feizible, and th'approches easy,
By your own kindred. Now, Sir, Cymball thinks,
The Master here, and governor of the Staple,
By his fine arts, and pomp of his great place
To draw her! He concludes, she is a woman!
And that so soon as sh' hears of the New Office,
She Will come to visit it, as they all have longings
After new sights, and motions! But your bounty,
Person, and bravery must atchieue her.

She is
The talk of the time! th'aduenture of the age!

You cannot put your self upon an action
Of more importance.

All the world are suitors to her.

All sorts of men, and all professions!

You shall have stall-fed Doctors, crammed Divines
Make love to her, and with those studied
And perfumed flatteries, as no rome can stink
More elegant, then where they are.

Well chanted
Old Canter thou singst true.

And (by your leave)
Good Masters worship, some of your velvet coat
Make corpulent curt'sies to her, till they crack for it.

There Is Doctor Almanac wooes her, one of the Ieerers,
A fine Physician.

Your Sea-captaine, Shun-field,
Gives out he will go upon the Cannon for her.

Though his loud mouthing get him little credit,

Young Master Pyed-mantle, the fine Herrald
Professes to deriuer her through all ages,
From all the Kings, and Queens, that ever were.

And Master Madrigall, the crowned Poet
Of these our times, does offer at her praises
As fair as any, when it shall please Apollo,
That wit and rhyme may meet both in one subject.

And you to bear her from all these, it will be --

A work of fame.

Of honor.

Celebration.

Worthy your name.

The Peni-boyes to live in it,

It is an action you were built for, Sir,

And none but you can do it.

I Will undertake it,

And carry it.

Fear me not, for since I came
Of mature age, I have had a certain itch
In my right eye, this corner, here, do you see?
To do some work, and worthy of a Chronicle.

How now Gossip! how does the Play please you?


Very scuruily, me thinks, and sufficiently naught.


As a body would wish: here is nothing but a young Prodigal, come of age, who
makes much of the Barber, buys him a place in a new Office, in the air, I know
not where, and his man of Law to follow him, with the Beggar to boot, and they
two help him to a wise


I, she is a proper piece! that such creatures can broke for.


I cannot abide that nasty fellow, the Beggar, if he had been a Court-Begger
in good clothes; a Beggar in velvet, as they say, I could have endured him


Or a begging scholar in black, or one of these beggarly Poets, gossip, that
would hang upon a young heir like a horseleech


Or a threadbare Doctor of Physic, a poor Quackesaluer.


Or a Sea-captaine, half steru'd.


I, these were tolerable Beggars, Beggars of fashion! you shall see some such
anon


I would feign see the Fool, gossip, the Fool is the finest man in the
company, they say, and has all the wit: He is the very Justice of Peace of the
Play, and can cemmit whom he will, and what he will, error, absurdity, as
the toy takes him, and no man say, black is his eye, but laugh at him


But they have no Fool in this Play, I am afraid, gossip.


It Is a wise Play, then.


They are all fools, the rather, in that.


Like enough.


My husband, ( Timothy Tatle, God rest his poor soul) was wont to say, there
was no Play without a Fool, and a Devil in it; he was for the Devil still,
God bless him. The Devil for his money, would he say, I would feign see the
Devil. And why would you so feign see the Devil? would I say. Because he has
horns, wife, and may be a cuckold, as well as a Devil, he would answer: You
are even such another, husband, quoth I. Was the Devil ever married? where do
you read, the Devil was ever so honorable to commit Matrimony; The Play will
tell us, that, says he, we will go see it to morrow, the Devil is an Ass.
He is an errant learned man, that made it, and can write, they say, and I am
foully deceived, but he can read too


I remember it gossip, I went with you, by the same token, Mrs. Trouble Truth
diswaded us, and told us, he was a profane Poet, and all his Plays had
Devils in them. That he kept schole vpo' the Stage, could conjure there, above
the Schole of Westminster, and Doctor Lamb too: not a Play he made, but had a
Devil in it. And that he would learn us all to make our husbands Cuckolds at
Plays: by another token, that a young married wife in the company, said, she
could find in her heart to steal thither, and see a little of the vanity
through her masque, and come practice at home


O, it was, Mistress --


Nay, Gossip, I name no body. It may be 'twas my self.


But was the Devil a proper man, Gossip?


As fine a gentleman, of his inches, as ever I saw trusted to the Stage, or any
where else: and loved the common wealth, well as ere a Patriot of 'hem all: he
would carry away the Vice on his back, quick to Hell, in every Play where he
came, and reform abuses


There was the Devil of Edmonton, no such man, I warrant you.


The Coniurer coosen'd him with a candles end, he was an Ass.


But there was one Smug, a Smith, would have made a horse laugh, and broke his
halter, as they say


O, but the poor man had got a shrewd mischance, one day.


How, Gossip?


He had dressed a Rogue Jade in the morning, that had the Staggers, and had got
such a spice of 'hem himself, by noone, as they would not away all the Play
time, do what he could, for his heart


'Twas his part, Gossip, he was to be drunk, by his part.


Say you so, I understood not so much.


Would we had such an other part, and such a man in this play, I fear 'twill
be an excellent dull thing


Expect, intend it.


YOur Grace is sad me thinks, and melancholy!
You do not look upon me with that face,
As you were wont, my Goddess, bright Pecunia:
Although your Grace be fallen, of two in the hundred,
In vulgar estimation; yet am I,
You Graces servant still: and teach this body,
To bend, and these my aged knees to buckle,
In adoration, and just worship of you.
Indeed, I do confess, I have no shape
To make a minion of, but I Am your Martyr,
Your Graces Martyr. I can hear the Rogues,
As I do walk the streets, whisper, and point,
There goes old Peni-boy, the slave of money,
Rich Peni-boy, Lady Pecunia's drudge,
A sordid Rascal, one that never made
Good meal in his sleep, but sells the acates are sent him,
Fish, Foul, and venison, and preserues himself,
Like an old hoary Rat, with moldy pye-crust.
This I do hear, rejoicing, I can suffer
This, and much more, for your good Graces sake.

Why do you so my Guardian? I not bid you,
Cannot my Grace be gotten, and held too,
Without your selfe-tormentings, and your watches,
Your macerating of your body thus
With cares, and scantings of your diet, and rest?

O, no, your services, my Princely Lady,
Cannot with too much zeal of rites be done,
They are so sacred.

But my Reputation.
May suffer, and the worship of my family,
When by so servile means they both are sought.

You are a noble, young, free, gracious Lady,
And would be every body, in your bounty,
But you must not be so. They are a few
That know your merit, Lady, and can valew't.
Your self scarce understands your proper powers.
They are all-mighty, and that we your servants,
That have the honor here to stand so near you,
Know; and can use too. All this Nether-world
Is yours, you command it, and do sway it,
The honor of it, and the honesty,
The reputation, I, and the religion,
(I was about to say, and had not erred)
Is Queen Pecunia's. For that style is yours,
If mortals knew your Grace, or their own good.

Please your Grace to retire.

I fear your Grace
Has taken too much of the sharp air.

O no!
I could endure to take a great deal more
(And with my constitution, were it left)
Unto my choice, what think you of it, Statute?

A little now and then does well, and keeps
Your Grace in your complexion.

And true temper.

But too much Madame, may increase cold rheumes,
Nourish catarrhes, green sicknesses, and agues,
And put you in consumption.

Best to take
Advice of your grave women, Noble Madame,
They know the state o'your body, and ha'studied
Your Graces health.

And honor. Here'll be visitants,
Or Suitors by and by; and it is not fit
They find you here.

'Twill make your Grace too cheap
To give them audience presently.

Leave your Secretary,
To answer them.

Wait you here, Broker.

I shall Madame.
And do your Graces trusts with diligence.

WHat luck's this? I am come an inch too late,
Do you hear Sir? Is your worship of the family
Unto the Lady Pecunia?

I serve her Grace, Sir,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infanta.

Has she all those Titles, and her Grace besides,
I must correct that ignorance and ouer-sight,
Before I do present. Sir, I have drawn
A Pedigree for her Grace, though yet a Nouice
In that so noble study.

A Herald at Arms?

No Sir, a Pursiuant, my name is Pyed-mantle.

Good Master Pyed-mantle.

I have deduced her. --

From all the Spanish Mines in the West-Indi'es,
I hope: for she comes that way by her mother,
But, by her Grandmother, she is Duchess of Mines.

From man's creation I have brought her.

No further?
Before Sr, long before, you have done nothing else,
Your Mines were before Adam, search your Office,
Roll five and twenty, you will find it so,
I see you are but a Nouice, Master Pyed-mantle.
If you had not told me so.

Sir, an apprentise
In armoiry. I have read the Elements,
And Accidence, and all the leading books,
And I have, now, upon me a great ambition,
How to be brought to her Grace, to kiss her hands.

Why, if you have acquaintance with Mistress Statute,
Or Mistress Band, my Ladies Gentlewomen,
They can induce you. One is a Judges Daughter,
But somewhat stately; the other Mistress Band,
Her father's but a Scriuener, but she can
Almost as much with my Lady, as the other,
Especially, if Rose Wax the Chambermaid
Be willing. Do you not know her, Sir, neither?

No in troth Sir.

She Is a good plyant wench,
And easy to be wrought, Sir, but the Nurse
Old mother Mortgage, if you have a Tenement,
Or such a morsel? though she have no teeth,
She loves a sweet meat, any thing that melts
In her warm gummes, she could command it for you
On such a trifle, a toy. Sir, you may see,
How for your love, and this so pure complexion,
(A perfect Sanguine) I have ventured thus,
The straining of a ward, opening a door
Into the secrets of our family:

I pray you let me know, Sir, unto whom
I am so much beholden; but your name.

My name is Broker, I am Secretary,
And Usher, to her Grace.

Good Master Broker!

Good Mr. Pyed-mantle.

Why? you could do me,
If you would, now, this favor of your self.

Truly, I think I could: but if I would,
I hardly should, without, or Mistress Band,
Or Mistress Statute, please to appear in it.
Or the good Nurse I told you of, Mistress Mortgage.
We know our places here, we mingle not
One in another sphere, but all move orderly,
In our own orbs; yet we are all Concentricks.

Well, Sir, I Will wait a better season.

Do,
And study the right means, get Mistress Band
Wax.

I have a hope, Sir, that I may, by chance,
Light on her Grace, as she is taking the air:

That air of hope, has blasted many an ayrie
Of Castrills like your self: Good Master Pyed-mantle,

Well said, Master Secretary, I stood behind
And heard thee all. I honor thy dispatches.
If they be rude, untrained it our method
And have not studied the rule, dismiss 'hem quickly,
Where Is Lickfinger my Cook? that unctuous rascal?
He Will never keep his hour, that vessel of kitchinstuffe!

Here he is come, Sir.

Pox upon him kidney,
Always too late!

To wish 'hem you, I confess,
That ha'them already.

What?

The pox!

The piles,
The plague, and all diseases light on him,
Knows not to keep his word. I Would keep my word sure!
I hate that man that will not keep his word,
When did I break my word?

Or I, till now?
And it is but half an hour.

Half a year:
To me that stands upon a minute of time.
I am a just man, I love still to be just.

Why? you think I can run like light-foot Ralph,
Or keep a wheele-barrow, with a sail in town here,
To whirle me to you: I have lost two stone
Of suet in the service posting hither,
You might have followed me like a watering pot,
And seen the knots I made along the street;
My face dropped like the skimmer in a fritter pan,
And my whole body, is yet (to say the truth)
A roasted pound of butter, with grated bread in it!

Believe you, he that list. You stayed of purpose,
To have my venison stink, and my foul mortified,
That you might have 'hem --

A shilling or two cheaper,
That Is your jealousy.

Perhaps it is.
Will you go in, and view, and value all?
Yonder is venison sent me! foul! and fish!
In such abundance! I am sick to see it!
I wonder what they mean! I have told 'hem of it!
To burden a weak stomach! and provoke
A dying appetite! thrust a sin upon me
I never was guilty of! nothing but gluttony!
Gross gluttony! that will undo this Land!

And bating two in the hundred.

I, that same's
A crying sin, a fearful damned device,
Eats up the poor, deuoures 'hem --

Sir, take heed
What you give out.

Against your grave great Solons?
Numae Pompilij, they that made that Law?
To take away the poore's inheritance?
It was their portion: I will stand to it.
And they have robbed 'hem of it, plainly robbed 'hem,
I still am a just man, I tell the truth.
When moneies went at Ten in the hundred, I,
And such as I, the servants of Pecunia,
Could spare the poor two out of ten, and did it,
How say you, Broker?

Ask your Echo)

You did it.

I am for Justice, when did I leave Justice?
We knew 'twas theirs, they'had right and Title to it.
Now --

You can spare 'hem nothing.

Very little,

As good as nothing.

They have bound our hands
With their wise solemn act, shortened our arms.

Beware those worshipful ears, Sir, be not shortened,
And you play Crop i the fleet, if you use this license.

What license, Knave? Informer?

I am Lickfinger,
Your Cook.

A saucy Jack you are, that is once;
What said I, Broker?

Nothing that I heard, Sir.

I know his gift, he can be deaf when he list.

Have you provided me my bushel of eggs?
I did bespeake? I do not care how stale,
Or stinking that they be; let 'hem be rotten:
For ammunition here to pelt the boys,
That break my windows?

Yes Sir, I have spared 'hem
Out of the custard politic for you, the Majors.

It Is well, go in, take hence all that excess,
Make what you can of it, your best: and when
I have friends, that I inuit at home, provide me
Such, such, and such a dish, as I bespeake;
One a^ a time, no superfluity.
Or if you have it not, return me money;
You know my ways.

They are a little crooked.

How knave?

Because you do indent.

It Is true, Sir,
I do indent you shall return me money.

Rather then meat, I know it: you are just still.

I love it still. And therefore if you spend
The red-Deere pyes in your house, or sell'hem forth, Sir,
Cast so, that I may have their coffins all,
Returned here, and pil'd up: I would be thought
To keep some kind of house.

By the mouldie signs?

And then remember meat for my two dogs:
Fat flaps of mutton; kidneyes; rumps of veale;
Good plentious scraps; my maid shall eat the relics.

When you and your dogs have dined. A sweet reuersion.

Who's here? my Courtier? and my little Doctor?
My Muster-Master? and what Plouer's that
They have brought to pull?

I know not, some green Plouer.
I Will find him out.

Do, for I know the rest,
They are the Ieerers, mocking, flouting Iackes.

HOw now old Money-Bawd? we are come --

To ieere me,
As you were wont, I know you.

No, to give thee
Some good security, and see Pecunia.

What is it?

Our selves.

Wee^l be one bound for another.

This noble Doctor here.

This worthy Courtier.

This Man of war, he was our Muster-Master.

But a Sea-Captaine now, brave Captain Shun-field.

You snuff the air now, as the scent displeased you?

Thou needst not fear him man, his credit is sound,

And season^d too, since he took salt at Sea.

I do not love pickl^d security,
Would I had one good Fresh-man in for all;
For truth is, you three stink.

You are a Rogue,

I think I am, but I will lend no money
On that security, Captain.

Here Is a Gentleman,
A Fresh-man in the world, one Master Madrigall.

Of an untainted credit; what say you to him?

He Is gone me thinks, where is he? Madrigall?

H^ has an odd singing name, is he an Heir?

An Heir to a fair fortune,

And full hopes:
A dainty Scholar, and a pretty Poet!

You Have said enough. I have no money, Gentlemen,
An' he go to it in ryme once, not a penny.

Why, he is of years, though he have little beard.

His beard has time to grow. I have no money:
Let him still dable in Poetry. No Pecunia
Is to be seen.

Come, thou love to be costiue
Still in thy curt'sie; but I have a pill,
A golden pill to purge away this melancholy.

It Is nothing but his keeping of the house here,
With his two drowsy dogs.

A drench of sack
At a good tavern, and a fine fresh pullet,
Would cure him.

Nothing but a young Hair in white-broth,
I know his diet better then the Doctor.

What Lick-finger? mine old host of Ram-Alley?
You have some mereat here.

Some dosser of Fish
Or Foul to fetch of.

An odd bargain of Venison,
To drive.

Will you go in, knave?

I must needs,
You see who drives me, gentlemen.

Not the devil.

He may be in time, he is his Agent, now.

You are all cogging Iacks, a Couy of wits,
The Ieerers, that still call together at meals:
Or rather an Airy, for you are birds of prey:

And are so truly feared, but not beloved
One of another: as no one dares break
Company from the rest, lest they should fall,
Upon him absent.

O! the only Oracle
That ever peept, or spoke out of a dublet.

How the rogue stinks, worse then a Fishmonger sleeves!

Or Curriers hands!

And such a perboil'd visage!

His face looks like a Diers apron, just!

A sodden head, and his whole brain a possit curd!

I, now you ieere, ieere on; I have no money.

I wonder what religion he is of!

No certain species sure, A kind of mule!
That Is half an Ethnicke, half a Christian!

I have no money, gentlemen.

This stock.
He has no sense of any virtue, honor,
Gentry or merit.

You say very right,
My meritorious Captain, (as I take it!)
Merit will keep no house, nor pay no house rent.
Will Mistress Merit go to market, think you?
Set on the pot, or feed the family?
Will Gentry clear with the Butcher? or the Baker?
Fetch in a Phessant, or a brace of Partridges,
From good-wife Poulter, for my Ladies supper.

See! this pure rogue!

This rogue has money though,
My worshipful brave Courtier has no money.
No, nor my valiant Captain.

Hang you rascal.

Nor you, my learned Doctor. I loved you
Whil you did hold your practice, and kill tripe wives.
And kept you to your vrinall; but since your thombes
Have greased the Ephemerides, casting figures,
And turning over for your Candle-rents,
And your twelve houses in the Zodiac:
With your Almutens, Alma cantaras,
Troth you shall cant alone for Peny-boy.

I told you what we should find him, a mere Bawd.

A rogue, a cheater.

What you please, gentlemen,
I am of that humble nature and condition,
Never to mind your worships, or take notice
Of what you throw away, thus. I keep house here
Like a lame Cobbler, never out of doors,
With my two dogs, my friends; and (as you say)
Drive a quick pretty trade, still. I get money:
And as for Titles, be they Rogue, or Rascal,
Or what your worships fancy, let 'hem pass
As transitory things; they are mine to day,
And yours to morrow.

Hang thee dog.

Thou curre.

You see how I do blush, and am ashamed
Of these large attributes? yet you have no money.

Well wolf, Hyaena, you old pockie rascal,
You will have the Hernia fall down again
Into your Scrotum, and I shall be sent for.
I will remember then, that; and your Fistula
In ano, I cured you of.

Thank your dog-leech craft.
They were 'holesome piles, before you meddl'd with'hem.

What an ungrateful wretch is this?

He minds
A courtesy no more, then London Bridge,
What Arch was mended last.

He never thinks.
More then a logge, of any grace at Court,
A man may do him: or that such a Lord
Reached him his hand.

O yes! if grace would strike
The brewers Tally, or my good Lords hand,
Would quit the scores. But Sir, they will not do it.
Here Is a piece, my good Lord piece, does all.
Goes to the Butehers. fetches in a muton,
Then to the Bakers, brings in bread, makes fires,
Gets wine, and does more real Courtesies,
Then all my Lords, I know: My sweet Lord piece!
You are my Lord, the rest are cogging Iacks,
Under the Rose.

Rogue, I could beat you now,

True Captain, if you durst beat any other.
I should believe you, but indeed you are hungry;
You are not angry Captain, if I know you
Aright; good Captain. No, Pecunia,
Is to be seen, though Mistress Band would speak,
Or little Blushet- Wax, be never so easy,
I Will stop mine ears with her, against the Sirens,
Court, and Philosophy. God be wi^ you, Gentlemen,
Provide you better names. Pecunia is for you.

What a damned Harpy it is? where is Madrigall?
Is he sneek'd hence.

Here he comes with Broker,
Pecunia's Secretary.

He may do some good
With him perhaps. Where ha you been Madrigall?

Above with my Ladies women, reading verses.

That was a favor. Good morrow, Master Secretary.

Good morrow, Master Usher.

Sir, by both
Your worshipful Titles, and your name Mas Broker.
Good morrow.

I did ask him if he were
Amphibion Broker.

Why?

A creature of two natures,
Because he has two Offices.

You may ieere,
You have the wits, young Gentlemen. But your hope
Of Helicon, will never carry it, here,
With our fat family; we have the dullest,
Most unboar'd Ears for verse amongst our females.
I grieved you read so long, Sir, old Nurse Mortgage,
She snoar'd in the Chair, and Statute (if you marked her)
Fell fast a sleep, and Mistress Band, she nodded,
But not with any consent to what you read.
They must have somewhat else to chinke, then rymes.
If you could make an Epitaph on your Land,
(Imagine it on departure) such a Poem
Would wake 'hem, and bring Wax to her true temper.

I faith Sir, and I will try.

It Is but earth,
Fit to make brickes and tyles of.

Pocks upon it
It Is but for pots, or pipkins at the best.
If it would keep us in good tobacco pipes,

'Twere worth keeping.

Or in porc'lane dishes
There were some hope.

But this is a hungry soil,
And must be helped.

Who would hold any Land
To have the trouble to marle it.

Not a gentleman.

Let clownes and hyndes affect it, that love ploughes,
And carts, and harrowes, and are busy still,
In vexing the dull element.

Our sweet Songster
Shall rarifie t into air.

And you Mas. Broker
Shall have a feeling.

So it supple, Sir,
The nerves.

O! it shall be palpable,
Make thee run through a hoope, or a thombe-ring,
The nose of a tobacco pipe, and draw
Thy ductile bones out, like a knitting needle,
To serve my subtle turns.

I shall obey Sir,
And run a thread, like an houre-glasse.

Where is Broker?
Are not these flies gone yet? pray quit my house,
I Will smoke you out else.

O! the Prodigal!
Will you be at so much charge with us, and loss?

I have heard you have offered Sir, to lock up smoke,
And cauke your windores, spar up all your doors,
Thinking to keep it a close prisoner wi'you,
And wept, when it went out, Sir, at your chimney.

And yet his eyes were dryer then a pummise.

A wretched rascal, that will bind about
The nose of his bellows, lest the wind get out
When he is abroad.

Sweepes down no cobwebs here,
But sells 'hem for cut-fingers. And the spiders,
As creatures reared of dust, and cost him nothing,
To fat old Ladies monkeyes.

He has offer^d
To gather up spilt water, and preserve
Each hair falls from him to stop balls with all.

A slave, and an Idolater to Pecunia!

You all have happy memories, Gentlemen,
In rocking my poor cradle. I remember too,
When you had lands, and credit, worship, friends,
I, and could give security: now, you have none,
Or will have none right shortly. This can time,
And the vicissitude of things. I have
All these* and money too, and do possess 'hem,
And am right heartily glad of all our memories,
And both the changes.

Let us leave the viper.

He Is glad he is rid of his torture, and so soon.
Broker, come hither, up, and tell your Lady,
She must be ready presently, and Statute,
Band, Mortgage, Wax. My prodigal young kinsman
Will straight be here to see her; 'top of our house,
The flourishing, and flanting Peny-boy.
We were but three of us in all the world,
My brother Francis, whom they called Franck Peny-boy,
Father to this: he is dead. This Peny-boy,
Is now the heir! I, Richer Peny-boy,
Not Richard, but old Harry Peny-boy,
And (to make rhyme) close, wary Peny-boy
I shall have all at last, my hopes do tell me.
Go, see all ready; and where my dogs have falted,
Remove it with a broom, and sweeten all
With a slice of juniper, not too much, but sparing,
We may be faulty our selves else, and turn prodigal,
In entertaining of the Prodigal.
Here he is! and with him -- what! a Clapper Dudgeon!
That Is a good sign; to have the beggar follow him,
So near at his first entry into fortune.

HOw now old Uncle? I am come to see thee.
And the brave Lady, here, the daughter of Ophir,
They say thou keepst.

Sweet Nephew, if she were
The daughter of the Sun, she is at your service,
And so am I, and the whole family,
Worshipful Nephew.

Sai'st thou so, dear Uncle?
Welcome my friends then: Here is, Domine Picklocke:
My man of Law, sollicits all my causes.
Follows my business, makes, and compounds my quarrels,
Between my tenants and me, sowes all my strifes,
And reapes them too, troubles the country for me,
And vexes any neighbor, that I please.

But with commission?

Under my hand and seal.

A worshipful place!

I thank his worship for it.

But what is this old Gentleman?

A Rogue,
A very Canter, I Sir, one that maunds
Upon the Pad, we should be brothers though:
For you are near as wretched as my self,
You dare not use your money, and I have none.

Not use my money, cogging Jack, who uses it
At better rates? lets it for more in the hundred,
Then I do, Sirrah?

Be not angry uncle.

What? to disgrace me, with my Queen? as if
I did not know her value.

Sir, I meant


Hold your peace,
You are a Jack.

Uncle, he shall be a John,
And, you go to that, as good a man as you are.
An' I can make him so, a better man,
Perhaps I will too. Come, let us go.

Nay, kinsman,
My worshipful kinsman; and the top of our house;
Do not your penitent uncle that affront,
For a rash word, to leave his joyful threshold,
Before you see the Lady that you long for.
The Venus of the time, and state, Pecunia!
I do perceive, your bounty loves the man,
For some concealed virtue, that he hides
Under those rags.

I owe my happiness to him,
The waiting on his worship, since I brought him
The happy News, welcome to all young heirs.

Thou did indeed, for which I thank thee yet,
Your Fortunate Princess, Uncle, is long a coming.

She is not rigged, Sir, setting forth some Lady,
Will cost as much as furnishing a Fleet,
Here she is come at last,
Guilt in the prow.

Is this Pecunia?

Vouchsafe my toward kinsman, gracious Madame,
The favor of your hand.

Nay, of my lips, Sir,
To him.

She kisses like a mortal creature,
Almighty Madame, I have longed to see you.

And I have my desire, Sir, to behold
That youth, and shape, which in my dreams and wakes,
I have so often contemplated, and felt
Warm in my veins, and native as my blood.
When I was told of your arrival here,
I felt my heart beat, as it would leap out,
In speech; and all my face it was a flame,
But how it came to pass I do not know.

O! beauty loves to be more proud then nature,
That made you blush. I cannot satisfy
My curious eyes, by which alone I Am happy,
In my beholding you.

They pass the complement
Prettily well.

I, he does kiss her, I like him.

My passion was clear contrary, and doubtful,
I shook for fear, and yet I danced for joy,
I had such motions as the Sunne-beames make
Against a wall, or playing on a water,
Or trembling vapor of a boiling pot --

That Is not so good, it should ha'bin a Crucible,
With molten metal, she had understood it.

I cannot talk, but I can love you, Madame.
Are these your Gentlewomen? I love them too.
And which is mistress Statute? Mistress Band?
They all kiss close, the last stuck to my lips.

It was my Ladies Chambermaid, soft- Wax.

Soft lips she has, I am sure on it. Mother Mortgage,
I Will owe a kiss, till she be younger, Statute,
Sweet Mistress Band, and honey, little Wax,
We must be better acquainted.

We are but servants, Sir.

But whom her Grace is so content to grace,
We shall observe.

Aand with all fit respect.

In our poor places.

Being her Graces shadows.

A fine well-spoken family. What Is thy name?

Broker.

Me thinks my uncle should not need thee;
Who is a crafty Knave, enough, believe it.
Art thou her Graces Steward?

No, her Usher, Sir.

What, of the Hall? thou have a sweeping face,
Thy beard is like a broom.

No barren chin, Sir,
I am no Eunuch, though a Gentleman-usher.

Thou shall go with us. Uncle, I must have
My Princess forth to day.

Whither you please, Sir,
You shall command her.

I will do all grace
To my new servant.

Thanks unto your bounty;

Tip, Top, and Tuft of all our family!
But, Sir, conditioned always, you return
Statute, and Band home, with my sweet, soft Wax,
And my good Nurse, here, Mortgage.

O! what else?

By Broker.

Do not fear.

She shall go wi' you,
Whither you please, Sir, any where.

I see
A Money-Bawd, is lightly a Flesh-Bawd, too.

Are you advised? Now of my faith, this Canter
Would make a good grave Burgess in some Barn.

Come, thou shall go with us, uncle.

By no means, Sir.

We'll have both Sack, and Fiddlers.

I Will not draw
That charge upon your worship.

He speaks modestly,
And like an Uncle,

But Mas Broker, here,
He shall attend you, Nephew; her Graces Usher,
And what you fancy to bestow on him,
Be not too lavish, use a temperate bounty,
I Will take it to my self.

I will be princely,
While I possess my Princess, my Pecunia.

Where is it you eat?

Hard by, at Picklocks lodging.
Old Lickfinger's the Cook, here in Ram-Alley.

He has good cheer; perhaps I Will come and see you.

O, fie! an Alley, and a Cooks-shop, gross,

Let your meat rather follow you, to a tavern.

A tauern's as unfit too, for a Princess.

No, I have known a Princess, and a great one,
Come forth of a tavern.

Not go in, Sir, though.

She must go in, if she came forth: the blessed
Pokahontas (as the Historian calls her
And great Kings daughters of Virginia)
Has bin in womb of a tavern; and besides,
Your nasty Uncle will spoil all your mirth,
And be as noisome.

That Is true.

No 'faith,
Dine in Apollo with Pecunia,
At brave Duke Wadloos, have your friends about you,
And make a day on it.

Content 'ifaith:
Our meat shall be brought thither. Simon the King,
Will bid us welcome.

Patron, I have a suite.

What Is that?

That you will carry the Infanta,
To see the Staple', her Grace will be a grace,
To all the members of it.

I will do it:
And have her Arms set up there, with her Titles,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infanta.
And in Apollo. Come (sweet Princess) go.

Broker, be careful of your charge.

I warrant you.

Why, this is duller and duller! intolerable! scuruy! neither Devil nor Fool
in this Play! pray God, some on us be not a witch, Gossip, to forespeake the
matter thus


I fear we are all such, and we were old enough: But we are not all old enough
to make one witch. How like you the Vice in the Play


Which is he?


Three or four: old Covetousness, the sordid Peny-boy, the Money-bawd, who is
a flesh-bawd too, they say


But here is never a Fiend to carry him away. Besides, he has never a wooden
dagger! I Would not give a rush for a Vice, that has not a wooden dagger to snap
at every body he meets


That was the old way, Gossip, when Iniquity came in like Hokos Pokos, in a
Iuglers ierkin, with false skirts, like the Knave of Clubs! but now they are
attired like men and women of the time, the Vices, male and female! Prodigality
like a young heir, and his Mistress Money (whose favors he scatters like
counters) prank't up like a prime Lady, the Infanta of the Mines


I, therein they abuse an honorable Princess, it is thought.


By whom is it so thought? or where lies the abuse?


Plain in the stiling her Infanta, and giving her three names.


Take heed, it lie not in the vice of your interpretation: what have Aurelia,
Clara, Pecunia to do with any person? do they any more, but express the
property of Money, which is the daughter of earth, and drawn out of the Mines?
Is there nothing to be called Infanta, but what is subject to exception? Why
not the Infanta of the Beggars? or Infanta of the Gypsies? as well as King of
Beggars, and King of Gypsies


Well, and there were no wiser then I, I would sow him in a sack, and send him
by sea to his Princess


Faith, and he heard you Censure, he would go near to stick the Asses ears
to your high dressing, and perhaps to all ours for harkening to you


By'r Lady but he should not to mine, I would harken, and harken, and censure,
if I saw cause, for the other Princess sake Pokahontas, surnamed the blessed,
whom he has abused indeed (and I do censure him, and will censure him) to say
she came forth of a Tavern, was said like a paltry Poet


That Is but one Gossips opinion, and my Gossip Tatle's too! but what says
Expectation, here, she sits sullen and silent


Troth I expect their Office, their great Office! the Staple, what it will be!
they have talked on it, but we see it not open yet; would Butter would come in,
and spread it-selfe a little to us


Or the butter-box, Buz, the Emissary.


When it is churn'd, and dish't, we shall hear of it.


If it be fresh and sweet butter; but say it be sower and wheyish.


Then it is worth nothing, mere pot- butter, fit to be spent in suppositories,
or greasing coach-wheeles, stale stinking butter, and such I fear it is, by
the being barrell'd up so long


Or rank Irish butter.


Have patience Gossips, say that contrary to our expectations it prove right,
seasonable, salt butter


Or to the time of year, in Lent, delicate Almond butter! I have a sweet tooth
yet, and I will hope the best; and sit down as quiet, and calm as butter,
look as smooth, and soft as butter; be merry, and melt like butter; laugh and
be fat like butter: so butter answer my expectation, and be not mad butter; If
it be: It shall both July and December see

I say no more, But -- Dixi.


IN this following Act, the Office is opened, and shown to the Prodigal, and
his Princess Pecunia, wherein the allegory, and purpose of the Author has
hitherto been wholly mistaken, and so sinister an interpretation been made,
as if the souls of most of the Spectators had lived in the eyes and ears of
these ridiculous Gossips that tattle between the Acts. But he prays you thus
to mend it. To consider the News here vented, to be none of his News, or any
reasonable man's; but News made like the times News, (a weekly cheat to draw
money) and could not be fitter reprehended, then in raising this ridiculous
Office of the Staple, wherein the age may see her own folly, or hunger and
thirst after publish^d pamphlets of News, set out every Saturday, but made all
at home, and no syllable of truth in them: then which there cannot be a greater
disease in nature, or a fouler scorn put upon the times. And so apprehending
it, you shall do the Author, and your own judgment a courtesy, and perceive
the trick of alluring money to the Office, and there cooz'ning the people. If
you have the truth, rest quiet, and consider tha

YOu hunt upon a wrong scent still, and think
The air of things will carry 'hem, but it must
Be reason and proportion, not fine sounds,
My cousin Cymball, must get you this Lady.
You have entertained a petty-fogger here,
Picklocke, with trust of an Emissaries place,
And he is, all, for the young Prodigal,
You see he has left us.

Come, you do not know him,
That speak thus of him. He will have a trick,
To open us a gap, by a trap-doore,
When they least dream on it. Here he comes. What news?

Where is my brother Buz? my brother Ambler?
The Register, Examiner, and the Clerks?
Appear, and let us muster all in pomp,
For here will be the rich Infanta, presently,
To make her visit. Peny-boy the heir,
My Patron, has got leave for her to play
With all her train, of the old churl, her Guardian.
Now is your time to make all court unto her;
That she may first but know, then love the place,
And show it by her frequent visits here:
And afterward, get her to soiourne with you.
She will be weary of the Prodigal, quickly.

Excellent news!

And counsel of an Oracle!

How say you cousin Fitton?

brother Picklock,
I shall adore thee, for this parcel of tidings,
It will cry up the credit of our Office,
Eternally, and make our Staple immortal!

Look your addresses, then, be fair and fit,
And entertain her, and her creatures, too,
With all the migniardise, and quaint Caresses,
You can put on 'hem.

Thou seem, by thy language,
No less a Courtier, then a man of Law.
I must embrace thee.

Tut, I am Vertumnus,
On every change, or chance, upon occasion,
A true Chamaelion, I can color for it.
I move upon my axell, like a turne-pike.
Fit my face to the parties, and become
Straight, one of them.

Sirs, up, into your Desks,
And spread the rolls upon the Table, so.
Is the Examiner set?

Yes, Sir.

Ambler, and Buz,
Are both abroad, now.

We Will sustain their parts.
No matter, let them ply the affairs without,

On with the cloak, and you with the Staple gown,
And keep your state, stoop only to the Infanta;
We'll have a flight at Mortgage, Statute, Band,
And hard, but we'll bring Wax unto the retriue:
Each know his several province, and discharge it.

Picklock.

Cuz,
What did I say?

You have rectified my error!

BY your leave, Gentlemen, what news? good, good still?
IN your new Office? Princess, here is the Staple!
This is the Governor, kiss him, noble Princess,
For my sake. Thom, how is it honest Thom?
Princess?
This is my Creature, give him your hand to kiss,
He was my Barber, now he writes Clericus!
I bought this place for him, and gave it him.

He should have spoke of that, Sir, and not you:
Two do not do one Office well.

It Is true,
But I am loath to lose my courtesies.

So are all they, that do them, to vain ends,
And yet you do lose, when you pay you selves.

No more of your sentences, Canter, they are stale,
We come for news, remember where you are.
I pray thee let my Princess hear some news,
Good Master Cymbal.

What news would she hear?
Or of what kind, Sir?

Any, any kind.
So it be news, the newest that thou have,
Some news of State, for a Princess.

Read from Rome, there.

They write, the King of Spain is chosen Pope.

How?

And Emperor too, the thirtieth of February.

Is the Emperor dead?

No, but he has resigned,
And trailes a pike now, under Tilly.

For penance.

These will beget strange turns in Christendom!

And Spinola is made General of the Jesuits.

Stranger!

Sir, all are alike true, and certain.

All the pretense to the fifth Monarchy,
Was held but vain, until the ecclesiastique,
And secular powers, were united, thus,
Both in one person.

'T has bin long the aim
Of the house of Austria.

See but Maximilian.
His letters to the Baron of Bouttersheim,
Or Scheiter-huyssen.

No, of Liechtenstein,
Lord Paul, I think.

I have heard of some such thing.
Don Spinola made General of the Jesuits!
A Priest!

O, no, he is dispensed with all,
And the whole society, who do now appear
The only Enginers of Christendom.

They have bin thought so long, and rightly too.

Witness the Engine, that they have presented him,
To wind himself with, up, into the Moon:
And thence make all his discoueries!

Read on.

And Vittellesco, he that was last General,
Being now turned Cook to the society,
Has dressed his excellence,

What potch'd?

No, powdered.

All the yolke is wild fire,
As he shall need beleaguer no more towns,
But throw his Egg in.

It shall clear consume,
Palace, and place; demolish and bear down,
All strengths before it!

Never be extinguished!
Till all become one ruin!

And from Florence,

They write was found in Galileos study,
A burning Glass (which they have sent him too)
To fire any Fleet that is out at Sea --

By Mooneshine, is it not so?

Yes, Sir, in the water.

His strengths will be irresistable, if this hold!
Ha'you no News against him, on the contrary?

Cornelius-Son,
Has made the Hollanders an invisible Eele,
To swim the haven at Dunkirke, and sink all
The shipping there.

Why have not you this, Thom?

Pontificiall side.

How, change sides, Thom. 'Twas never in my thought
To put thee up against our selves. Come down,
Quickly.

Why, Sir?

I venter'd not my money
Upon those terms: If he may change; why so.
I Will ha him keep his own side, sure.

Why, let him,
It Is but writing so much over again.

For that I Will bear the charge: There Is two Pieces,

Come, do not stick with the gentleman.

I Will take none Sir.
And yet he shall ha'the place.

They shall be ten, then,
Thom: and the Office shall take 'hem. Keep your side, Thom.
Know your own side, do not forsake your side, Thom.

Read.

They write here one Cornelius-Son,
Has made the Hollanders an invisible Eele,
To swim the Haven at Dunkirke, and sink all
The shipping there.

But how is it done?

I Will show you Sit.
It is an Automa, runs vnderwater,
With a snug nose, and has a nimble tail
Made like an auger, with which tail she wrigles
Betwixt the coasts of a Ship, and sinkes it straight.

Whence ha'you this news.

From a right hand I assure you,
The Eele-boats here, that lie before Queen-Hyth,
Came out of Holland.

A most brave device,
To murder their flat bottomes.

I do grant you:
Spinola have a new Project:
To bring an army over in corke-shooes,
And land them, here, at Harwich? all his horse
Are shod with cork, and fourscore pieces of ordinance,
Mounted upon cork-carriages, with bladders,
In stead of wheels to run the passage over
At a springtide.

Is It true?

As true as the rest.

He Will never leave his engines: I would hear now
Some curious news.

As what?

Magic, or Alchimy
Or flying in the air, I care not what.

They write from Libtzig (reverence to your ears)

Is by the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross,
Produced unto perfection, in so sweet
And rich a tincture --

As there is no Princess,
But may perfume her chamber with the extraction.

There Is for you. Princess.

What, a fart for her?

spirit.

Beware how she resents it.

And what have thou, Thom?

The perpetual Motion,
Is here found out by an Alewife in Saint Katherines,
At the sign of the dancing Bears.

What, from her tap?
I Will go see that, or else I Will send old Canter.
He can make that discovery.

Yes, in Ale.

Let me have all this News, made up, and sealed.

The people press upon us, please you, Sir,
Withdraw with your fair Princess. There Is a room
Within, Sir, to retire too.

No, good Register,
We'll stand it out here, and observe your Office;
What News it issues.

It Is the house of fame, Sir,
Where both the curious, and the negligent;
The scrupulous, and careless; wild, and stayed;
The idle, and laborious; all do meet,
To taste the Cornu copiae of her rumors,
Which she, the mother of sport, pleases to scatter
Among the vulgar: Baits, Sir, for the people!
And they will bite like fishes.

Let Us see it.

Have you in your profane Shop, any News
Of The Saints at Amsterdam?

Yes, how much would you?

Six penny worth.

Lay your money down, read, Thomas.

The Saints do write, they expect a Prophet. shortly,
The Prophet Baal, to be sent over to them,
To calculate a time, and half a time,
And the whole time, according to Naometry.

What Is that?

The measuring of the Temple: a Cabal
Found out but lately, and set out by Archie,
Or some such head, of whose long coat they have heard,
And being black, desire it.

Peace be with them!

So there had need, for they are still by the ears
One with another.

It is their zeal.

Most likely.

Have you no other of that species?

Yes,
But dearer, it will cost you a shilling.

Verily,
There is a' nine-pence, I will shed no more.

Not; to the good of the Saints?

I am not sure,
Tha^ man is good.

Read, from Constantinople,
(...) penny'orth.

They give out here, the grand Signior
Is ^^^tainely turned Christian, and to clear
The controversy 'twixt the Pope and him,
Which is the Antichrist; he means to visit
The Church at Amsterdam, this very Summer,
And quit all marks of the beast.

Now joyful tidings.
Who brought in this? Which Emissary?

Buz.
Your countryman.

Now, blessed be the man,
And his whole Family, with the Nation.

Yes, for Amboyna, and the Justice there!
This is a Doper, a she Anabaptist!
Seal and deliver her her news, dispatch.

news from the Indies? any mirac
Done in Iapan, by the Jesuits? or in China?

Colony of cooks
To be set a shore of the coast of America,
For the conversion of the Caniballs,
And making them good, eating Cbristians.
Here comes the Colonel that undertakes it.

Who? captain Lickfinger?

News, news my boys!
I am to furnish a great feast to day,
And I would have what news the Office affords.

We were venting some of you, of your new project,

Before 'twas paid for, you were somewhat too hasty.

What Lickfinger! will thou convert the Caniballs,
With spit and pan Divinity?

Sir, for that
I will not urge, but for the fire and zeal
To the true cause; thus I have undertaken:
With two Lay-brethren, to my self, no more,
O^eo the broach, the other of the boyler,
In one six months, and by plain cookery,
No magic to it, but old Iaphets physic,
The father of the Europaean Arts,
To make such sauces for the Savages,
And cooks their meats, with those enticing steemes,
As it would make our Caniball-Christians,
Forbear the mutual eating one another,
Which they do do, more cunningly, then the wild
Anthropophagi; that snatch only strangers,
Like my old Patrons dogs, there.

O, my Uncles!
Is dinner ready, Lickfinger?

When you please, Sir.
I was bespeaking but a parcel of news,
To strew out the long meal withal, but 't seems
You are furnished here already.

O, not half!

What Court-newes is there? any Proclamations,
Or Edicts to come forth.

Yes, there is one.
That the Kings Barber has got, for aid of our trade:
Whereof there is a manifest decay.
Precept for the wearing of long hair,
To run to seed, to sow bald pates withal,
And the preserving fruitful heads, and chins,
To help a mystery, almost antiquated.
Such as are bald and barren beyond hope,
Are to be separated, and set by
For Vshers, to old Countesses.

And Coachmen.
To mount their boxes, reverently, and drive,
Like Lapwings, with a shell vpo' their heads.
Through the streets. Have you no News of the Stage?
They Will ask me abou new Plays, at dinner time.
And I should be as dumb as a fish.

O! yes.
There is a Legacy left to the Kings Players,
Both for their various shifting of their Scene,
And dext'rous change o'their persons to all shapes,
And all disguises: by the right reverend
Archbishop of Spalato.

He is dead,
That played him!

Then, h'has lost his share of the Legacy.

What news of Gundomar?

A second Fistula,
Or an excoriation (at the least)
For putting the poor English-play, was writ of him,
To such a sordid use, as (is said) he did,
Of cleansing his posterior's.

Justice! Justice!

Since when, he lives condemned to his share, at Bruxels.
And there sits filing certain politic hinges,
To hang the States on, h'has heau'd off the hooks.

What must you have for these?

Thou shall pay nothing,
But reckon 'hem in in the bill. There Is twenty pieces,
Her Grace bestows upon the Office, Thom,
Write thou that down for News.

We may well do it,
We have not many such.

There Is twenty more,
If you say so; my Princess is a Prinecesse!
And put that too, under the Office Seal.

If it will please your Grace to soiourne here,
And take my roof for covert, you shall know
The rites belonging to your blood, and birth,
Which few can apprehend: these sordid servants,
Which rather are your keepers, then attendants,
Should not come near your presence. I would have
You waited on by Ladies, and your train
Borne up by persons of quality, and honor,
Your meat should be served in with curious dances,
And set upon the board, with virgin hands,
Tun^d to their voices; not a dish removed,
But to the Music, nor a drop of wine,
Mixed, with his water, without Harmony,

You are a Courtier, Sir, or somewhat more;
That have this tempting language!

I Am your servant,
Exellent Princess, and would have you appear
That, which you are. Come forth State, and wonder,
Of these our times, dazzle the vulgar eyes.
And strike the people blind with admiration.

Why, that is the end of wealth! thrust riches outward,
And remain beggars within: contemplate nothing
But the vile sordid things of time, place, money,
And let the noble, and the precious go,
Virtue and honesty; hang 'hem; poor thin membranes
Of honor; who respects them? O, the Fates!
How has all just, true reputation fallen,


Pity, the Gentleman is not immortal.

As he gives out, the place is, by description.

A very Paradise, if you saw all, Lady.

I am the Chambermaid, Sir, you mistake,
My Lady may see all.

Sweet Mistress Statute, gentle Mistress Band,
And Mother Mortgage, do but get her Grace
To soiourne here. --

I thank you gentle Wax,

If it were a Chattell, I would try my credit.

So it is, for term of life, we count it so.

She means, Inheritance to him, and his heirs:
Or that he could assure a State, of years:
I Will be his Statute-Staple, Statute-Merchant,
Or what he please.

He can expect no more.

His cousin Alderman Security,
That he did talk of so, even now --

Who, is
The very broch of the bench, gem of the City.

He and his Deputy, but assure his life
For one seven years.

And see what we'll do for him,
Upon his scarlet motion.

And old Chain,
That draws the city-eares.

When he says nothing,
But twirles it thus.

A moving Oratory!

Dumb Rethoricke, and silent eloquence!
As the fine Poet says!

Come, they all scorn us,
Do you not see it? the family of scorn!

Do not believe him! gentle Master Picklocke,
They understood you not: the Gentlewomen,
They thought you would have my Lady soiourne, with you,
And you desire but now and then, a visit?

Yes, if she pleased, Sir, it would much advance
Unto the Office, her continual residence!
(I speak but as a member)

It Is enough.
I apprehend you. And it shall go hard,
But I Will so work, as some body shall work her!

'pray you change with our Master, but a word about it.

Well, Lickfinger, see that our meat be ready,
Thou have News enough.

Something of Bethlem Gabor,
And then I Am gone.

We hear he has devised
Drum, to fill all Christendom with the sound:
But that he cannot draw his forces near it,
To march yet, for the violence of the noise.
And therefore he is feign by a design,
To carry 'hem in the air, and at some distance,
Till he be married, then they shall appear.

Or never; well, God b'w'you (stay, who is here?)
A little of the Duke of Bauier, and then --

H'has taken a gray habit, and is turned
The Churches Millar, grinds the catholic grist
With every wind: and Tilly takes the toll.

Ha'you any news of the Pageants to send down?
Into the several Counties. All the country
Expected from the city most brave speeches,
Now, at the Coronation.

It expected
More then it understood: for, they stand mute,
Poor innocent dumb things; they are but wood.
As is the bench and blocks, they were wrought on, yet
If May Day come, and the Sun shine, perhaps,
They Will sing like Memnons Statue, and be vocal.

Ha'you any Forest-newes?

None very wild, Sir,
Some tame there is, out of the Forest of fools,
A new Park is a making there, to sever
Cuckolds of Antler, from the Rascals. Such,
Whose wives are dead, and have since cast their heads,
Shall remain Cuckolds-pollard.

I Will have that news.

And I. 2. And I. 3. And I. 4. And I. 5. And I.

Sir, I desire to be excused; and, Madame:
I cannot leave my Office, the first day.
My Cousin Fitton here, shall wait upon you.
And Emissary Picklocke.

And Thom: Clericus?

I cannot spare him yet, but he shall follow you,
When they have ordered the Rolls. Shut up the Office,
When you have done, till two a clock.

BY your leave, Clerks,
Where shall we dine to day? do you know? the Ieerers.

Where Is my fellow Fitton?

New gone forth.

Cannot your Office tell us, what brave fellows
Do eat together to day, in town, and where?

Yes, there is a Gentleman, the brave heir, young Peny-boy.
Dines in Apollo.

Come, let us thither then,
I have supt in Apollo!

With the Muses?

No, Sir.
But with two Gentlewomen, called, the Graces.

They' were ever three in Poetry.

This was truth,

Sir, Master Fitton's there too!

All the better!

We may have a ieere, perhaps.

Yes, you will drink, Doctor.
(If there be any good meat) as much good wine now,
As would lay up a Dutch Ambassador.

If he dine there, he is sure to have good meat,
For, Lickfinger prouides the dinner.

Who?
The glory of the Kitchen? that holds Cookery,
A trade from Adam? quotes his broths, and sallads?
And swears he is not dead yet, but translated
In some immortal crust, the past of Almonds?

The same. He holds no man can be a Poet,
That is not a good Cook, to know the palats,
And several tastes of the time. He draws all Arts
Out of the Kitchen, but the Art of Poetry,
which he concludes the same with Cookery.

Tut, he maintains more heresies then that.
He Will draw the Magisterium from a minc'd-pye,
And prefer Iellies, to your Iulips, Doctor.

I was at an Olla Podrida of his making,
Was a brave piece of cookery! at a funeral!
But opening the pot-lid, he made us laugh,
who'had wept all day! and sent us such a tickling
Into our nostrills, as the funeral feast
Had bin a wedding-dinner.

Gi'him allowance,
And that but moderate, he will make a Siren
Sing in the Kettle, send in an Arion,
In a brave broth, and of a watery green,
Just the Sea-colour, mounted on the back
Of a grown Cunger, but, in such a posture,
As all the world would take him for a Dolphin.

He Is a rare fellow, without question! but
He holds some Paradoxes.

I, and Pseudodoxes.
Mary, for most, he is Orthodox in the Kitchen.

And knows the Clergies taste!

I, and the Layties!

You think not o'your time, we'll come too late,
If we go not presently.

Away then.

Sirs,
You must get of this news, to store your Office,
Who dines and sups in the town? where, and with whom?
'Twill be beneficial: when you are stored;
And as we like our fare, we shall reward you.

A hungry trade, 'twill be.

Much like D. Humphries,
But, now and then, as th'holesome proverb says,
'Twill obsonare famem ambulando.

Shut up the Office: gentle brother Thomas.

Brother, Nathaniel, I ha'the wine for you.
I hope to see us, one day, Emissaries.

Why not? S'lid, I despair not to be Master!

HOw now? I think I was borne under Hercules star!
Nothing but trouble and tumult to oppress me?
Why come you back? where is your charge?

I have brought
A Gentleman to speak with you?

To speak with me?
You know it is death for me to speak with any man.
What is he? set me a chair.

He Is the Master
Of the great Office.

What?

The Staple of News,
A mighty thing, they talk Six thousand a year.

Well bring your six in. Where have you left Pecunia?

Sir, in Apollo, they are scarce set.

Bring six.

Here is the Gentleman.

He must pardon me,
I cannot rise, a diseased man.

By no means, Sir,
Respect your health, and ease.

It is no pride in me!
But pain, pain; what is your errand, Sir, to me?
Broker, return to your charge, be Argus-eyed,
Awake, to the affair you have in hand,
Serve in Apollo, but take heed of Bacchus.
Go on, Sir.

I am come to speak with you.

It Is pain for me to speak, a very death,
But I will hear you!

Sir, you have a Lady,
That soiournes with you.

Ha? I am somewhat short
In my sense too --

Pecunia.

OF that side,
Very imperfect, on --

Whom I would draw
Oftener to a poor Office, I am Master of --

My hearing is very dead, you must speak quicker.

Or, if it please you, Sir, to let her soiourne
In part with me; I have a moiety
We will divide, half of the profits.

Ha?
I hear you better now, how come they in?
Is it a certain business, or a casual?
For I am loath to seek out doubtful courses,
Run any hazardous paths, I love straight ways,
A just, and upright man! now all trade totters.
The trade of money, is fallen, two in the hundred.
That was a certain trade, while the age was thrifty,
And men good husbands, looked unto their stocks,
Had their minds bounded; now the public Riot
Prostitutes all, scatters away in coaches,
In foot-mens coats, and waiting women's gowns,
They must have velvet hanches (with a pox)

Bate of the use? I am mad with this times manners.

You said even now, it was death for you to speak.

I, but an anger, a just anger, (as this is)
Puts life in man. Who can endure to see
The fury of men's gullets, and their groines?

What Stews, Ponds, Parks, Coupes, Garners, Magazines?
What veluets, tissues, scarfes, embroyderies?
And laces they might lack? They covet things --
Superfluous still; when it were much more honor
They could want necessary! What need has Nature
Of silver dishes? or gold chamber-pots?
Of perfumed napkins? or a numerous family,
To see her eat? Poor, and wise she, requires
Meat only; Hunger is not ambitious:
Say, that you were the Emperor of pleasures,
The great Dictator of fashions, for all Europe,
And had the pomp of all the Courts, and Kingdoms,
Laid forth unto the show? to make your self
Gazed, and admired at? You must go to bed,
And take your natural rest: then, all this vanishes.
Your bravery was but showen; 'twas not possessed:
While it did boast it self, it was then perishing.

This man has healthful lungs.

All that excess
Appeared as little yours, as the Spectators.
It scarce fills up the expectation
Of a few hours, that entertaines men's lives.

He has the monopoly of sole-speaking.


Why should I not?
Is it not under mine own roof? my feeling?

But I came hete to talk with you.

Why, an'I will not
Talk with you, Sir? you are answered, who sent for you?



But you came, why then
Go, as you came, here is no man holds you, There,
There lies your way, you see the door.

This's strange!

It Is my ciuility, when I do not relish
The party, or his business. Pray you be gone, Sir.
I Will have no venture in your Ship, the Office
Your Bark of Six, if'twere sixteen, good, Sir,



I think I am Sir, truly.

A Rascal, and a money-bawd.

My surnames:

A wretched Rascal!

You will ouerflow --
And spill all.

Caterpiller, moath,
Horse-leach, and dung-worme --

Still you lose your labor.
I am a broken vessel, all runs out:
A shrunk old Dryfat. Fare you well, good Six.

A notable tough Rascal! this old Peny-boy! right City-bred!


In Siluer-streete, the Region of money, a good seat for a Usurer.


He has rich ingredients in him, I warrant you, if they were extracted, a true
receipt to make an Alderman, an' he were well wrought upon, according to Art


I would feign see an Alderman in chimia! that is a treatise of Aldermanity
truly written


To show how much it differs from Vrbanity.


I, or humanity. Either would appear in this Penny boy, an' he were rightly
distilled. But how like you the news? you are gone from that


O, they are monstrous! scuruy! and stale! and too exotic! ill cooked! and ill
dish'd


They were as good, yet, as butter could make them!


In a word, they were beastly buttered! he shall never come of my bread more,
nor my in mouth, if I can help it. I have had better news from the
bake-house, by ten thousand parts, in a morning: or the conduicts in
Westminster! all the news of Tutle-street, and both the Alm'ries! the two
Sanctuaries long, and round Wool-staple! with Kings-street, and Chanon-row to
boot


I, my Gossip Tatle knew what fine slips grew in Gardiners-lane; who kissed the
Butchers wife with the Cowes-breath; what matches were made in the
bowling-Alley, and what bettes won and lost; how much grieft went to the Mill
and what besides: who coniur'd in Tutle-fields, and how many? when they never
came there. And which Boy rode upon Doctor Lamb, in the likeness of a roaring
Lion, that run away with him in his teeth, and has not devoured him yet


Why, I had it from my maid Ioane Hearsay: and she had it from a limb of the
school, she says, a little limb of nine year old; who told her, the Master
left out his coniuring book one day, and he found it, and so the Fable came
about. But whether it were true, or no, we Gossips are bound to believe it,
an't be once out, and a foot: how should we entertain the time else, or find
our selves in fashionable discourse, for all companies, if we do not credit
all, and make more of it, in the reporting


For my part, I believe it: and there were no wiser then I, I would have never
a cunning Schoolmasters in England. I mean a Cunning-Man, a Schoolmasters;
that is a Coniurour, or a Poet, or that had any acquaintance with a Poet. They
make all their scholars Play-boyes! Is It not a fine sight, to see all our
children made Enterluders? Do we pay our money for this? we send them to
learn their Grammar, and their Terence, and they learn their play-books?
well, they talk, we shall have no more Parliaments (God bless us) but an'wee
have, I hope, Zeale-of-the-land Buzy, and my Gossip, Rabby Trouble-truth will
start up, and see we shall have painful good Ministers to keep School, and
Catechize our youth, and not teach 'hem to speak Plays, and Act Fables of
false news, in this manner, to the super-^exation of Town and Country, with
a wanion


Ome, Gentlemen, let us breath from healths a while.
This Lickfinger has made us a good dinner,
For our Pecunia: what shal's do with our selves,
While the women water? and the Fiddlers eat?

Let Us ieere a little.

Ieere? what is that?

Expect, Sr.

We first begin with our selves, and then at you,

A game we use.

We ieere all kind of persons
We meet withal, of any rank or quality,
And if we cannot ieere them, we ieere our selves.

A pretty sweet society! and a grateful!

'Pray let us see some.

Have at you, then Lawyer.
They say, there was one of your coat in Bet'lem, lately,

I wonder all his Clients were not there.

They were the madder sort.

Except, Sir, one
Like you, and he made verses.

Madrigall,
A ieere.

I know.

But what did you do, Lawyer?
When you made love to Mistress Band, at dinner.

Why? of an Advocate, he grew the Clyent.

Well played, my Poet.

And showed the Law of nature
Was there above the Common Law.

Quit, quit,

Call you this ieering? I can play at this,
It Is like a Ball at Tennis.

Very like,
But we were not well in.

It Is indeed, Sir.
When we do speak at volley, all the ill
We can one of another.

As this morning,
(I would you had heard us) of the Rogue your Uncle.

That Mony-bawd.

We called him a Coat-card
Of The last order.

What Is that? a Knave?

Some readings have it so, my manuscript
Does speak it, ^arlet.

And your self a Fool
Of The first rank, and one shall have the leading
Of The right hand file, under this brave Commander.

What say thou, Canter?

Sir, I say this is
A very wholesome exercise, and comely.
Like Lepers, showing one another their scabs.
Or flies feeding on ulcers.

What News Gentlemen?
Have you any news for after dinner? me thinks
We should not spend our time unprofitably.

They never lie, Sir, between meals, against supper
You may have a Bale or two brought in.

This Canter,
Is an old envious Knave!

A very Rascal!

I have marked him all this meal, he has done nothing
But mock, with scuruy faces, all we said.

A supercilious Rogue! he looks as if
He were the Patrico --

Or Archpriest of Canters,

He Is some primate metropolitan Rascal,
Our shot-clog makes so much of him.

The Law,
And he does govern him

What say you, Gentlemen?

We say, we wonder not, your man of Law,
Should be so gracious wi'you; but how it comes,
This Rogue, this Canter!

O, good words.

A fellow
That speaks no language --

But what gingling Gypsies,
And Pedlers trade in --

And no honest Christian
Can understand --

Why? by that argument,
You all are Canters, you, and you, and you,
All the whole world are Canters, I will prove it
In your professions.

I would feign hear this,
But stay, my Princess comes, provide the while,
I Will call for it anon. How fares your Grace?

I hope the fare was good.

Yes, Lickfinger,
And we shall thank you for it and reward you.

Nay, I Will not lose my argument, Lickfinger;
Before these Gentlemen, I affirm,
The perfect, and true strain of poetry,
Is rather to be given the quick Celler,
Then the fat Kitchen.

Heretic, I see
Thou art for the vain Oracle of the Botle.
The hogshead, Trismegistus, is thy Pegasus.
Thence flows thy Muses spring, from that hard hoof*
Seduced Poet, I do say to thee,
A Boyler, Range, and Dresser were the Fountains,
Of all the knowledge in the universe.
And they 'are the Kitchins, where the Master-Cooke --
(Thou do not know the man, nor can thou know him,
Till thou have served some years in that deep school,
That Is both the Nurse and Mother of the Arts,
And hear'st him read, interpret, and demonstrate!)
A Master-Cooke! Why, he is the man of men,
For a Professor! he designs, he draws,
He paints, he carues, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious foul and fish,
Some he dri-dishes, some motes round with broths.
Mounts marrowbones, cuts fifty angled custards,
Reares bulwark pies, and for his outerworkes
He raises Ramparts of immortal crust;
And teaches all the Tacticks, at one dinner:
What Ranks, what Files, to put his dishes in;
The whole Art Military. Then he knows,
The influence of the Stars upon his meats,
And all their seasons, tempers, qualities,
And so to fit his relishes, and sauces,
He has Nature in a pot, above all the Chemists,
Or airy brethren of the Rosie-crosse.
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Soldier, a Physician, a Philosopher,
A general Mathematician.

It is granted.

And that you may not doubt him, for a Poet --

This fury shows, if there were nothing else!
And it is divine! I shall for ever hereafter,
Admire the wisdom of a Cook!

And we, Sir!

O, how my Princess draws me,
And hales me in, as eddies draw in boats,
Or strong Charybdis ships, that sail too near
The shelues of Love! The tides of your two eyes!
Wind of your breath, are such as suck in all,
That do approach you!

Who has changed my servant?

Your self, who drink my blood up with your beams,
As does the Sun, the Sea! Pecunia shines
More in the world then he: and makes it Spring
Where ever she favors! 'please her but to show
Her melting wrests, or bare her yuorie hands,
She catches still! her smiles they are Love's fetters!
Her breasts his apples! her teats Stawberries!
Where Cupid (were he present now) would cry
Fare well my mothers milk, here is sweeter Nectar!
Help me to praise Pecunia, Gentlemen:
She Is your Princess, lend your wits,

A Lady,
The Graces taught to move!

The Hours did nurse!

Whose lips are the instructions of all Lovers!

Her eyes their lights, and riualls to the Stars!

A voice, as if that Harmony still spoke!

And polished skin, whiter then Venus foot!

Young Hebes neck, or Iunoe's arms!

A hair,
Large as the Mornings, and her breath as sweet,
As meddowes after rain, and but new mowne!

Laeda might yield unto her, for a face!

Hermione for breasts!

Flora, for cheeks!

And Helen for a mouth!

Kiss, kiss 'hem, Princess.

The pearl does strive in whiteness, with her neck,

But loses by it: here the Snow thawes Snow;
One frost resolves another!

O, she has
A front too slippery to be looked upon!

And glances that beguile the seers eyes!

Kiss, kiss again, man of war?

I say, she is more, then Fame can promise of her.
A Theme, that is overcome with her own matter!
Praise is struck blind, and deaf, and dumb with her!
She does astonish Commendation!

Well pumpt in faith old Sailor:
Though he be a slugge. What says my Poet-sucker!
He Is chewing his Muses cudde, I do see by him.

I have almost done, I want but e'ne to finish.

That Is the 'ill luck of all his works still.

What?

To begin many works, but finish none;

How does he do his Mistress work?

Imperfect.

I cannot think he finisheth that.

Let Us hear*

It is a Madrigall, I affect that kind
Of Poem, much.

And thence you have the name.

It is his Rose. He can make nothing else

I made it to the tune the Fiddlers played,
That we all liked so well.

Good, read it, read it.

The Sun is father of all mettalls, you know,
Silver, and gold.

I, leave your Prologues, say!

As bright as is the Sun her Sire,
Or Earth her mother, in her best atyre,
Or Mint, the Midwife, with her fire,
Comes forth her Grace!
The splendor of the wealthiest Mines!
The stamp, and strength of all imperial lines,
Both majesty and beauty shines,
In her sweet face!
Look how a Torch, of Taper light,
Or of that Torches flame, a Beacon bright;

That Mint the Midwife does well.

That Is fairly said of Money.

Good!

Now there, I want a line to finish, Sir.

Or of that Beacons fire, Moone-light:

So takes she place!
And then I have a Saraband --
She makes good cheer, she keeps full boards,
She holds a Fair of Knights, and Lords,
A Market of all Offices,
And Shops of honor, more or less.
According to Pecunia's Grace,
The Bride has beauty, blood, and place,
The Bridegroom virtue, valor, wit,
And wisdom, as he stands for it.

It Is good.

Fiddlers. Nicke, the boy shall sing it,
Sweet Princess, kiss him, kiss 'hem all, dear Madame,
And at the close, vouchsafe to call them Cousins.

Sweet Cousin Madrigall, and Cousin Fitton,
My Cousin Shunfield, and my learned Cousin.

Al-manach, though they call him Almanac.

Why, here is the Prodigal prostitutes his Mistress!

And Picklocke, he must be a kinsman too.
My man of Law will teach us all to win,
And keep our own. Old Founder.

Nothing, I Sir?
I am a wretch, a beggar. She the fortunate.
Can want no kindred, we, the poor know none.

Nor none shall know, by my consent.

Nor mine,

Sing, boy,

Look, look, how all their eyes
Dance i'their heads (observe) scattered with lust!
At sight of their brave Idol! how they are tickled,
With a light air! the bawdy Saruband!
They are a kind of dancing engines all!
And set, by nature, thus, to run alone
To every sound! All things within, withou them,
Move, but their brain, and that stands still! mere monsters
Here, in a chamber, of most subtle feet!
And make their legs in tune, passing the streets!
These are the gallant spirits of the age!
The miracles of the time! that can cry up
And down men's wits! and set what rate on things
Their half-brain'd fancies please! Now pox upon 'hem.
See how solicitously he learnes the Iigge,
As if it were a mystery of his faith!

A dainty ditty!

O, he is a dainty Poet!
When he sets to it!

And a dainty Scholar!

No, no great scholar, he writes like a Gentleman.

Pox o'your Scholar.

Pox o'your distinction!
As if a Scholar were no Gentleman.
With these, to write like a Gentleman, will in time
Become, all one, as to write like an Ass,
These Gentlemen? these Rascals! I am sick
Of indignation at 'hem.

How do you liked, Sir?

It Is excellent!

'Twas excellently sung!

A dainty Air!

What says my Lickfinger?

I am telling Mistress Band, and Mistress Statute,
What a brave Gentleman you are, and Wax, here!
How much 'twere better, that my Ladies Grace,
Would here take up Sir, and keep house with you.

What say they?

We could consent, Sr, willingly.

I, if we knew her Grace had the least liking.

We must obey her Graces will, and pleasure.

I thank you, Gentlewomen, ply 'hem, Lickfinger.
Give mother Mortgage, there --

Her doze of Sack.
I have it for her, and her distance of Hum.

Indeed therein, I must confess, dear Cousin,
I am a most unfortunate Princess.

And
You still will be so, when your Grace may help it.

Who'ld lie in a room, with a close-stoole, and garlic?
And kennell with his dogs? that had a Prince
Like this young Peny-boy, to soiourne with?

He Will let you have your liberty --

Go forth,
Whither you please, and to what company --

Scatter your self amongst us --

Hope of Pernassus!
Thy Iuy shall not wither, nor thy Bays,
Thou shall be had into her Graces Cellar,
And there know Sack, and Claret, all December,
Thy vein is rich, and we must cherish it.
Poets and Bees swarm now adays, but yet
There are not those good Tauernes, for the one sort,
As there are Flowrie fields to feed the other.
Though Bees be pleased with dew, ask little Wax
That brings the honey to her Ladies hiue:
The Poet must have wine. And he shall have it.

BRoker? what Broker?

Who Is that? my Uncle!

I am abused, where is my Knave? my Broker?

Your Broker is laid out upon a bench, yonder,
Sack has seaz'd on him, in the shape of sleep.

He has been dead to us almost this hour.

This hour?

Why sigh you Sr? 'cause he is at rest?

It breeds my unrest.

Will you take a cup
And try if you can sleep?

No, cogging Jack,
Thou and thy cups too, perish.

O, the Sack!

The sack, the sack!

A Madrigall on Sack!

Or rather an Elegy, for the Sack is gone.

Why do you this, Sir? spill the wine, and rave?
For Brokers sleeping?

What through sleep, and Sack,
My trust is wronged: but I am still awake,
Grace, please you to quit
This strange lewd company, they are not for you.

No Guardian, I do like them very well.

Your Graces pleasure be observed, but you
Statute, and Band, and Wax, will go with me.

Truly we will not.

We will stay, and wait here
Upon her Grace, and this your Noble Kinsman.

Noble? how noble! who has made him noble?

Why, my most noble money has, or shall*
My Princess, here. She that had you but kept,
And treated kindly, would have made you noble,
And wise, too: nay, perhaps have done that for you,
An Act of Parliament could not, made you honest.
The truth is, Uncle, that her Grace dislikes
Her entertainment: specially her lodging.

Nay, say her iaile. Never unfortunate Princess,
Was used so by a Iaylor. Ask my women,
Band, you can tell, and Statute, how he has used me,
Kept me close prisoner, under twenty bolts --

And forty padlocks --

All malicious ingines
A wicked Smith could forge out of his iron:
As locks, and keys, shacles, and manacles,
To torture a great Lady.

H'has abused
Your Graces body.

No, he would have done,
That lay not in his power: he had the use
Of our bodies, Band, and Wax, and sometimes Statutes:
But once he would ha'smother'd me in a chest,
And strangled me in leather, but that you
Came to my rescue, then, and gave me air.

For which he cramb'd us up in a close box,
All three together, where we saw no Sun
In one six months.

A cruel man he is!

H'has left my fellow Wax out, in the cold,

Till she was stiff, as any frost, and crumbl'd
Away to dust, and almost lost her form.

Much ado to recover me.

Women Ieerers!
Have you learned too, the subtle faculty?
Come, I Will show you the way home, if drink,
Or, too full diet have disguised you.

Troth,
We have not any mind, Sir, of return --

To be bound back to back --

And have our legs
Turned in, or writhed about --

Or else displayed --

Be lodged with dust and fleas, as we were wont --

And dyeted with dogs dung.

Why? you whores,
My bawds, my instruments, what should I call you,
Man may think base enough for you?

Hear you, uncle.
I must not hear this of my Princess servants,
And in Apollo, in Pecunia's room,
Go, get you down the stairs: Home, to your Kennell,
As swiftly as you can. Consult your dogs,
The Lares of your family; or believe it,
The fury of a foote-man, and a drawer
Hangs over you.

Cudgel, and pot do threaten
A kind of vengeance.

Barbers are at hand.

Washing and shauing will ensue.

The Pumpe
Is not far off; If It were, the sink is near:
Or a good Jordan.

You have now no money,

But are a Rascal.

I am cheated, robbed
Ieer'd by confederacy.

No, you are kicked
And used kindly, as you should be.

Spurned,


A stinking dog, in a dublet, with foul linen.

A snarling Rascal, hence.

Out.

Well, remember,
I am coozen'd by my Cousin, and his whore!
Bane o'these meetings in Apollo!

Go, Sir,
Block, in a blanket else.

Down with him, Lickfinger.

Saucy Jack away,
Pecunia is a whore.

Play him down, Fiddlers,
And drown his noise. Who Is this!

O Master Pyed-mantle!



Her Graces Herald,

No Herald yet, a Heraldet.

What Is that?

A Canter.

O, thou said thou would sproue us all so!

Sir, here is one will prove himself so, straight,
So shall the rest, in time.

My Pedigree?
I tell you, friend, he must be a good Scholar,
Can my descent. I am of Princely race,
And as good blood, as any is in the mines,
Runs through my veins. I am, every limb, a Princess!
Duchess OF mines, was my great Grandmother.
And by the Fathers side, I come from Sol.
My Grandfather was Duke of Or, and matched
In the blood-royall of Ophyr.

Here Is his Coat.

I know it, if I hear the Blazon.

He bears
In a field Azure, a Sun proper, beamy,
Twelve of the second.

How farr's this from canting?

Her Grace does understand ti.

She can cant, Sr*

What be these? Besants?

Yes, an't please your Grace.

That is our Coat too, as we come from Or.
What line's this?

The rich mines of Potosi.
The Spanish mines in the West Indies.

This?

The mines of Hungary, this of Barbary.

But this, this little branch.

The Welsh-myne that.

I have Welsh-blood in me too, blaze, Sir, that Coat.

She bears (an't please you) Argent, three leekes vert
In Canton Or, and tassel'd of the first.

Is not this canting? do you understand him?

Not I, but it sounds well, and the whole thing*
Is rarely painted, I will have such a scrowle,
What ere it cost me.

Well, at better leisure,
We'll take a view of it, and so reward you.

Kiss him, sweet Princess, Cousin.

I will, if you will have it. Cousin Pyed-mantle.

I love all men of virtue, from my Princess,
Unto my beggar, here, old Canter, on,
On to thy proof, whom prove you the next Canter?

The Doctor here, I will proceed with the learned.
When he discourses of dissection,
Or any point of Anatomy: that he tells you,
Of Vena caua, and of vena porta,
The Meseraicks, and the Mesenterium.
What does he else but cant? Or if he run
To his Judicial Astrology,
And trowle the Trine, the Quartile and the Sextile,
Platicke aspect, and Partile, with his Hyleg
Or Alchochoden, Cuspes, and Horroscope.
Does not he cant? Who here does understand him?

This is no Canter, tho!

Or when my Master-Master
Talks of his Tacticks, and his Ranks, and Files;
His Bringers up, his Leaders on, and cries,
Faces about to the right hand, the left,
Now, as you were: then tells you of Redoubts,
Of Cats, and Cortines. Does not he cant?

Yes, 'faith.

My Eg-chind Laureat, here, when he comes forth
With Dimeters, and Trimeters, Tetrameters,
Pentameters, Hexameters, Catalecticks,
His Hyper, and his Brachy-Catalecticks,
His Pyrrhichs, Epitrites, and Choriambicks.
What is all this, but canting?

A rare fellow!

Some begging Scholar!

A decayed Doctor at least!

Nay, I do cherish virtue, though in rags.

And you, Mas Courtier.

Now he treats of you,
Stand forth to him, fair.

With all your fly-blowne proiects,
And looks out of the politics, your shut-faces,
And reserved Questions, and Answers that you game with, As
Is It a Clear business? will it manage well?
My name must not be used else. Here, 'twill dash.
Your business has received a taint, give off,
I may not prostitute my self. Tut, tut,
That little dust I can blow off, at pleasure.
Here Is no such mountain, yet, in the whole work!
But a light purse may level. I will tide
This affayre for you; give it freight, and passage.
And such mynt-phrase, as it is the worst of canting,
By how much it affects the sense, it has not.

This is some other then he seems!

How like you him?

This cannot be a Canter!

But he is, Sir,
And shall be still, and so shall you be too:
We'll all be Canters. Now, I think of it,
A noble Whimsie's come into my brain!
I Will build a College, Pecunia,
And call it Canters College, sounds it well?

Excellent!

And here stands my Father Rector,
And you Professors, you shall all profess
Something, and live there, with her Grace and me,
Your Founders: I Will endow't with lands, and means,
And Lickfinger shall be my Master-Cooke.
What? is he gone?

And a Professor.

Yes.

And read Apicius de reculinaria
To your brave Doxi^, and you!

You, Cousin Fitton,
Shall (as a Courtier) read the politics;
Doctor Al-manack, he shall read Astrology,
Shunfield shall read the Military Arts.



And Horace here, the Art of Poetry.
His Lyricks, and his Madrigalls, fine Songs,
Which we will have at dinner, steept in claret,
And against supper, sowc't in sack.

In troth
A divine Whimsey!

And a worthy work,
Fit for a Chronicle!

Is It not?

To all ages.

And Pyed-mantle, shall give us all our Arms,
But Picklocke, what would thou be? Thou can cant too.

In all the languages in Westminster Hall,
Pleas, Bench, or Chancery. Fee-Farme, Fee-Tayle,
Tennant in dower, At will, For Term of life,
By Copy of Court Roll, Knights service, Homage,
Fealty, Escuage, Soccage, or Frank almoigne,
Grand Sergeanty, or Burgage.

Thou appear'st,
(...) a Canter. Thou shall read
All Littletons tenures to me, and indeed
All my Conueyances.

And make 'hem too, Sir?
Keep all your Courts, be Steward o'your lands,
Let all your Leases, keep your Evidences,
But first, I must procure, and pass your mort-maine
You must have license from above, Sir.

Fear not,
Pecunia's friends shall do it.

But I shall stop it.
Your worships loving, and obedient father,
Your painful Steward, and lost Officer!
Who have done this, to try how you would use
Pecunia, when you had her: which since I see,
I will take home the Lady, to my charge,
And these her servants, and leave you my Cloak,
To travel in to Beggars Bush! A Seat,
Is built already, furnished too, worth twenty
Of your imagined structures, Canters College.

It Is his Father!

He Is alive, me thinks.

I knew he was no Rogue!

Thou, Prodigal,
Was I so careful for thee, to procure,
And plot wi' my learned Counsel, Master Picklocke,
This noble match for thee, and do thou prostitute,
Scatter thy Mistress favors, throw away
Her bounties, as they were red-burning coals,
Too hot for thee to handle, on such rascals?
Who are the scumme, and excrements of men?
If thou had fought out good, and virtuous persons
Of these professions: I'had loved thee, and them,
For these shall never have that plea against me,
Or color of advantage, that I hate
Their callings, but their manners, and their vices.
A worthy Courtier, is the ornament
Of a Kings Palace, his great Masters honor.
This is a moth, a rascal, a Court-rat,
That gnawes the commonwealth with broking suits,
And eating grieuances! So, a true Soldier,
He is his Countries strength, his Sovereigns safety,
And to secure his peace, he makes himself.
The heir of danger, nay the subject of it,
And runs those virtuous hazards, that this Scarre-crow
Cannot endure to hear of.

You are pleasant, Sir.

With you I dare be! Here is Pyed-mantle,
'Cause he is an Ass, do not I love a Herald?
Who is the pure preserver of descents,
The keeper fair of all Nobility,
Without which all would run into confusion?
Were he a learned Herald, I would tell him
He can give Arms, and marks, he cannot honor,
No more then money can make Noble: It may
Give place, and rank, but it can give no Virtue.
And he would thank me, for this truth. This dog-Leach,
You style him Doctor, 'cause he can compile
An Almanac; perhaps erect a Scheme
For my great Madams monkey: when 't has taken
A glister, and bewrai'd the Ephemerides.
Do I despise a learned Physician?
In calling him a Quack-Saluer? or blast
The everliving ghirlond, always green
Of a good Poet? when I say his wreath
Is piec'd and patched of dirty witherd flowers?
Away, I am impatient of these ulcers,
(That I not call you worse) There is no sore,
Or Plague but you to infect the times. I abhor
Your very scent. Come, Lady, since my Prodigal
Knew not to entertain you to your worth,
I Will see if I have learned, how to receive you,

Farewell my Beggar in velvet, for to day,
To morrow you may put on that grave Robe,
And enter your great work of Canters College,
Your work and worthy of a Chronicle,

Why? This was the worst of all! the Catastrophe!


The matter began to be good, but now: and he has spoiled it all, with his
Beggar there


A beggarly Jack it is, I warrant him, and a kin to the Poet.


Like enough, for he had the chiefest part in his play, if you mark it.


Absurdity on him, for a huge ouergrowne Play-maker! why should he make him
live again, when they, and we all thought him dead? If he had left him to his
rags, there had been an end of him


I, but set a beggar on horseback, he will never linne till he be a gallop.


The young heir grew a fine Gentleman, in this last Act!


So he did, Gossip: and kept the best company.


And feasted 'hem, and his Mistress!


And showed her to 'hem all! was not jealous!


But very communicatiue, and liberal, and began to be magnificent, if the
churl his father would have let him alone


It was spitefully done of the Poet, to make the Chuffe take him off in his
height, when he was going to do all his brave deeds


To found an Academy!


Erect a College!


Plant his Professors, and water his Lectures.


With wine, gossips, as he meant to do, and then to defraud his purposes?


Kill the hopes of so many towardly young spirits?


As the Doctors?


And the Courtiers! I protest, I was in love with Master Fitton. He did wear
all he had, from the hat-band, to the sho^e-tye, so politically, and would
stoop, and leere


And lie so, in wait for a piece of wit, like a Mouse-trap?


Indeed Gossip, so would the little Doctor, all his behavior was mere
glister! OF my conscience, he would make any parties physic in the world
work, with his discourse


I wonder they would suffer it, a foolish old fornicating Father, to ravish
away his sons Mistress


And all her women, at once, as he did!


I would have flyen in his gypsies face in faith.


It was a plain piece of political incest, and worthy to be brought before the
high Commission of wit. Suppose we were to censure him, you are the youngest
voice, Gossip Tatle, begin


Mary, I would have the old conicatcher coozen'd of all he has, in the young
heirs defense, by his learned Counsel, Mr Picklocke


I would rather the Courtier had found out some trick to beg him, from his
estate


Or the Captain had courage enough to beat him.


Or the fine Madrigall-man, in rhyme, to have run him out of the Country,
like an Irish rat


No, I would have Master Pyed-mantle, her Graces Herald, to pluck down his
hatchments, reuerse his coat armor, and nullify him for no Gentleman


Nay, then let Master Doctor dissect him, have him opened, and his tripes
translated to Lickfinger, to make a probation dish of


Agreed! Agreed!


Faith I would have him flat disinherited, by a decree of Court, bound to make
restitution of the Lady Pecunia, and the use of her body to his son


And her train, to the Gentlemen.


And both the Poet, and himself, to ask them all forgiveness!


And us too.


In two large sheets of paper --


Or to stand in a skin of parchment, (which the Court please)


And those filled with news!


And dedicated to the sustaining of the Staple!


Which their Poet has let fall, most abruptly?


Banckruptly, indeed!


You say wittily, Gossip, and therefore let a protest go out against him.


A mourniuall of protests; or a gleeke at least!


In all our names*


For a decayed wit --


Broken --


Non-soluent --


And, for ever, forfet --


To scorn, of Mirth?


Censure!


Expectation!


Subsign'd. Tatle, Stay, they come again.



And I am now a thing, worth looking at!
The same, I said I would be in the morning.
No Rogue, at a Comitia of the Canters,
Did ever there become his Parents Robes
Better, then I do these: great fool! and beggar!
Why do not all that are of those societies,
Come forth, and gratulate me one of theirs?
Me thinks, I should be, on every side, saluted,
Dauphin of beggars! Prince of Prodigalls!
That have so fallen under the ears, and eyes,
And tongues of all, the fable of the time,
Matter of scorn, and mark of reprehension!
I now begin to see my vanity,
Shine in this Glass, reflected by the foil!
Where is my Fashioner? my Feather-man?
My Linnener? Perfumer? Barber? all?
That tail of Riot, followed me this morning?
Not one! but a dark solitude about me,
Worthy my cloak, and patches; as I had
The epidemicall disease upon me:
And I Will sit down with it.

My Master! Maker!
How do you? Why do you sit thus of the ground, Sir?
Hear you the news?

No, nor I care to hear none.
Would I could here sit still, and slip away
The other one and twenty, to have this
Forgotten, and the day rac'd out, expunged,
In every Ephemerides, or Almanac.
Or if it must be in, that Time and Nature
Have decreed; still, let it be a day
Of tickling Prodigalls, about the gills;
Deluding gaping heirs, loosing their loves,
And their discretions; falling from the favors
Of their best friends, and parents; their own hopes;
And entering the society of Canters.

A doleful day it is, and dismal times
Are come upon us: I am clear undone.

How, Thom?

Why? broke! broke! wretchedly broke!

Ha!

Our Staple is all to pieces, quite dissolved!

Ha!

Shiuer'd, as in an earthquake! heard you not
The crack and ruins? we are all blown up!
Soon as they heard the Infanta was got from them,
Whom they had so devoured i'their hopes,
To be their Patroness, and soiourne with 'hem;
Our Emissaries, Register, Examiner,
Flew into vapor: our grave Governor
Into a subt'let air; and is returned
(As we do hear) grand- Captain of the Ieerers.
I, and my fellow melted into butter,
And spoiled our Ink, and so the Office vanished.
The last hum that it made, was, that your Father,
And Picklocke are fallen out, the man of Law.

How? this awakes me from my lethargy.

And a great suite, is like to be between 'hem,
Picklocke denies the Feofement, and the Trust,
(Your Father says) he made of the whole estate,
Unto him, as respecting his mortality,
When he first laid this late device, to try you.

Has Picklock then a trust?

I cannot tell,
Here comes the worshipful --

What? my velvet- heir,
Turned beggar in mind, as robes?

You see what case,
Your, and my Fathers plots have brought me to.

Your Fathers, you may say, indeed, not mine.
He Is a hard hearted Gentleman! I am sorry
To see his rigid resolution!
That any man should so put off affection,
And humane nature, to destroy his own!
And triumph in a victory so cruel!
He Is fallen out with me, for being yours,
And calls me Knave, and Traitors to his Trust,
Says he will have me thrown over the Bar --

Ha'you deserved it?

O, good heaven knows
My conscience, and the silly latitude of it!
A narrow minded man! my thoughts do dwell
All in a Lane, or line indeed; No turning,
Nor scarce obliquitie in them. I still look
Right forward to the intent, and scope of that
Which he would go from now.

Had you a Trust, then?

Sir, I had somewhat, will keep you still Lord
Of all the estate, (if I be honest) as
I hope I shall. My tender scrupulous breast
Will not permit me see the heir defrauded,
And like an Alyen, thrust out of the blood,
The Laws forbid that I should give consent,
To such a civil slaughter of a Son.

Where is the deed? have thou it with thee?

No,
It is a thing of greater consequence,
Then to be borne about in a black box,
Like a Low Country vorloffe, or Welsh-briefe.
It is at Lickfingers, under lock and key.

O, fetch it hither.

I have bid him bring it,
That you might see it.

Knows he what brings?

No more then a Gardiners Ass, what roots he carries,

I was a sending my Father, like an Ass,
A penitent Epistle, but I am glad
I did not, now.

Hang him, an austere grape,
That has no juice, but what is veriuice in him.



Show me a defiance!
If I can now commit Father, and Son,
And make my profits out of both. Commence
A suite with the oldman, for his whole state,
And go to Law with the Sons credit, undo
Both, both with their own money, it were a piece
Worthy my nightcap, and the Gown I wear,
A Picklockes name in Law. Where are you Sir?
What do you do so long?

I cannot find
Where I have laid it, but I have laid it safe.

No matter, Sir, trust you unto my Trust,
It Is that that shall secure you, an absolute deed!
And I confess, it was in Trust, for you,
Lest any thing might have happened mortal to him:
But there must be a gratitude thought on,
And aid, Sir, for the charges of the suite,
Which will be great, against such a mighty man,
As is our Father, and a man possessed
Of so much Land, Pecunia and her friends.
I am not able to wage Law with him,
Yet must maintain the thing, as mine own right,
Still for your good, and therefore must be bold
To use your credit for moneys.

What thou will,
So we be safe, and the Trust bear it.

Fear not,
It Is he must pay arrerages in the end.
We Will milk him, and Pecunia, draw their cream down,
Before he get the deed into his hands.
My name is Picklocke, but he will find me a Padlocke.

HOw now? conferring wi'your learned Counsel,
Vpo' the Cheat? Are you of the plot to coozen me?

What plot?

Your Counsel knows there, Mr Picklock,
Will you restore the Trust yet?

Sir, take patience.
And memory unto you, and bethink you,
What Trust? where do appear? I have your Deed,
Does your Deed specify any Trust? Is It not
A perfect Act? and absolute in Law?
Sealed and delivered before witnesses?
The day and date, emergent.

But what conference?
What oaths, and vows preceded?

I will tell you, Sir,
Since I am urged of those, as I remember,
You told me you had got a grown estate,
By griping means, sinisterly. (P. CA. How!)

And were
Even weary of it; if the parties lived,
From whom you had wrested it -- (P. CA. Ha!)

You could be glad,
To part with all, for satisfaction:
But since they had yielded to humanity,
And that just heaven had sent you, for a punishment
(You did acknowledge it) this riotous heir,
That would bring all to beggary in the end,
And daily sowed consumption, where he went --

You'old coozen both, then? your Confederate, too?

After a long, mature deliberation,
You could not think, where, better, how to place it --

Then on you, Rascal?

What you please in your passion,
But with your reason, you will come about
And think a faithful, and a frugall friend
To be preferred.

Before a Son?

A Prodigal,
A tubbe without a bottom, as you termed him;
For which, I might return you a vow, or two,
And seal it with an oath of thankfulness,
I not repent it, neither have I cause, Yet --

Forehead of steel, and mouth of brass! has impudence
Polished so gross a lie, and dare thou vent it?
Engine, composed of all mixed mettalls! hence,
I will not change a syllab, with thee, more,
Till I may meet thee, at a Bar in Court,
Before thy Judges.

Thither it must come,


I will not hear thee.

Sir, your ear to me, though.
Not that I see through his perplexed plots,
And hidden ends, nor that my parts depend
Upon the vnwinding this so knotted skeane,
Do I beseech your patience. Unto me
He has confessed the trust.

How? I confess it?

I thou, false man.

Stand up to him, and confront him.

Where? when? to whom?

To me, even now, and here,
Can thou deny it?

Can I eat, or drink?
Sleep, wake, or dream? arise, sit, go, or stand?
Do any thing that is natural?

Yes, lie:
It seems thou can, and periure: that is natural!

O me! what times are these! of frontlesse carriage!
An Egg of the same nest! the Fathers Bird!
It runs in a blood, I see!

I Will stop your mouth.

With what?

With truth.

With noise, I must have witness.
Where is your witness? you can produce witness?

As if my testimony were not twenty,
Balanced with thine?

So say all Prodigalls,
Sick of self-love, but that is not Law, young Scatter-good.
I live by Law.

Why? if thou have a conscience,
That is a thoussnd witnesses.

No, Court,
Grants out a Writ of Summons, for the Conscience,
That I know, nor Sub-paena, nor Attachment.
I must have witness, and of your producing,
Ere this can come to hearing, and it must
Be heard on oath, and witness.

Come forth, Thom,
Speak what thou heard'st, the truth, and the whole truth,
And nothing but the truth. What said this varlet?

A rat behind the hangings!

Sir, he said
It was a Trust! an Act, the which your Father
Had will to alter: but his tender breast
Would not permit to see the heir defrauded;
And like an alyen, thrust out of the blood.
The Laws forbid that he should give consent
To such a civil slaughter of a Son --

And talked of a gratuitie to be given,
And aid unto the charges of the suite;
Which he was to maintain, in his own name,
But for my use, he said.

It is enough.

And he would milk Pecunia, and draw down
Her cream, before you got the Trust, again.

Your ears are in my pocket, Knave, go shake 'hem,
The little while you have them.

You do trust
To your great purse.

I have you in a purse-net,
Good Master Picklocke, wi'your worming brain,
And wrigling ingine-head of maintenance,
Which I shall see you hole with, very shortly.
A fine round head, when those two lugs are off,
To trundle through a Pillory. You are sure
You heard him speak this?

I, and more.

Much more!

I Will prove yours maintenance, and combination,
And sue you all.

Do, do, my gowned Vulture,
Crop in Reuersion: I shall see you coyted
Over the Bar, as Barge-men do their billets.

This it is, when men repent of their good deeds,
And would ha'hem in again -- They are almost mad!
But I forgive their Lucida Interualla.
O, Lickfinger?

I sent it you, together with your keys,

How?

By the Porter, that came for it, from you,
And by the token, you had given me the keys,
And bad me bring it.

And why did you not?

Why did you send a counter-mand?

Who, I?

You, or some other you, you put in trust.

In trust?

Your Trust's another self, you know,
And without Trust, and your Trust, how should he
Take notice of your keys, or of my charge.

Know you the man?

I know he was a Porter,
And a sealed Porter for he bore the badge
On breast, I am sure.

I am lost! a plot! I sent it!

Why! and I sent it by the man you sent
Whom else, I had not trusted.

Plague o'your trust.
I am trussed up among you.

Or you may be.

In mine own halter, I have made the Noose.

What was it, Lickfinger?

A writing, Sir,
He sent for it by a token, I was bringing it:
But that he sent a Porter, and he seemed
A man of decent carriage.

'Twas good fortune!
To cheat the Cheater, was no cheat, but justice,
Put off your rags, and be your self again,
This Act of piety, and good affection,
Has partly reconciled me to you.

Sir.

No vows, no promises: too much protestation
Makes that suspected often, we would persuade.

Hear you the News?

The Office is down, how should we?

But of your uncle?

No.

He Is run mad, Sir.

How, Lickfinger?

Stark staring mad, your brother,
H'has almost killed his maid.

Now, heaven forbid.

But that she is Cat-liu'd, and Squirrill-limb'd,
With throwing bed-staues at her: h'has set wide
His outer doors, and now keeps open house,
For all the passers by to see his justice:
First, he has apprehended his two dogs,
As being of the plot to coozen him:
And there he sits like an old worm of the peace,
Wrapped up in furs at a square table, screwing,
Examining, and committing the poor curres,
To two old cases of close stools, as prisons;
The one of which, he calls his Lollard's tower,
The Other his Blocke-house, 'cause his two dogs names
Are Block, and Lollard.

This would be brave matter
Unto the Ieerers.

I, If so the subject
Were not so wretched.

Sure, I met them all,
I think, upon that quest.

'Faith, like enough:
The vicious still are swift to show their natures.
I Will thither too, but with another aim,
If all succeed well, and my simples take.

WHere are the prisoners?

They are forth-comming, S^,
Or coming forth at least.

The Rogue is drunk,
Since I committed them to his charge. Come hither,

Wine, of my worship! sack! Canary sack!
Could not your Badge ha'bin drunk with fulsome Ale?
Or Beer? the Porters element? but sack!

I am not drunk, we had, Sir, but one pynt,
An honest carrier, and my self.

Who paid for it?

Sir, I did give it him.

What? and spend sixpence!
A Frocke spend sixpence! sixpence!

Once in a year, Sir,

In seven years, varlet! Know thou what thou have done?
What a consumption thou have made of a State?
It might please heaven, (a lusty Knave and young)
To let thee live some seventy years longer.
Till thou art fourscore, and ten; perhaps, a hundred.
Say seventy years; how many times seven in seventy?
Why, seven times ten, is ten times seven, mark me,
I will demonstrate to thee on my fingers,
Sixpence in seven year (use upon use)
Grows in that first seven year, to be a twelue-pence.
That, in the next, two-shillings; the third foure-shillings;
The fourth seven year, eight-shillings; the fifth, sixteen:
The sixth, two and thirty; the seventh, three-pound four,
The eighth, six pound, and eight; the ninth, twelve pound sixteen;
And the tenth seven, five and twenty pound,
Twelve Shillings. This thou art fallen from, by thy riot!
Should thou live seventy years, by spending sixpence,
Once in the seven: but in a day to wast it!
There is a Sum that number cannot reach!
Out of my house, thou pest of prodigality!
Seed o'consumption! hence, a wicked keeper
Is often worse then the prisoners. There Is thy penny,
Four tokens for thee. Out, away. My dogs,
May yet be innocent, and honest. If not,
I have an entrapping question, or two more,
To put unto 'hem, a cross Intergatory,
And I shall catch 'hem; Lollard?
What whispring was that you had with Mortgage,
When you last licked her feet? The truth now. Ha?
Did you smell she was going? Put down that. And not,
Not to return? You are silent. good. And, when
Leaped you on Statute? As she went forth? Consent.
There was Consent, as she was going forth.
'Twould have been fitter at her coming home,
But you knew that she would not? To your Tower,
You are cunning, are you? I will meet your craft.
Block,
And tell me truly, what affronts do you know
Were done Pecunia? that she left my house?
None, say you so? not that you know? or will know?
I fear me, I shall find you an obstinate Curre.
Why, did your fellow Lollard cry this morning?
'Cause Broker kicked him? why did Broker kick him?
Because he pist against my Ladies Gown?
Why, that was no affront? no? no distaste?
You knew of none. Yo'are a dissembling Tyke,
To your hole, again, your Blocke-house. Lollard, arise,
Where did you lift your leg up, last? against what?
Are you struck Dummerer now? and whine for mercy?
Whose Kirtle was it, you gnawed too? Mistress Bands?
And Waxe's stockings? who did? Block bescumber
Statutes white suite? wi' the parchment lace there?
And Brokers Satin dublet? all will out.
They had offense, offense enough to quit me.
Block, fough, it is manifest. He shows it,
Should he for-sweare't, make all the Affadauits,
Against it, that he could before the Bench,
And twenty Iuries; he would be conuinc'd.

To prison again, close prison. Not you Lollard,

And yet there is a quirke come in my head,
For which I must commit you too, and close,
Do not repine, it will be better for you.

THis is enough to make the dogs mad too,
Let Us in upon him.

How now? what is the matter?
Come you to force the prisoners? make a rescue?

We come to bail your dogs.

They are not baileable,
They stand committed without bail, or mainprise,
Your bail cannot be taken.

Then the truth is,
We come to vex you.

Ieere you.

Bate you rather.

A bated vserer will be good flesh.

And tender, we are told.

Who is the Butcher,
Amongst you, that is come to cut my throat?

You would dye a calves death feign: but it is an Oxes,
Is meant you.

To be fairly knocked of the head.

With a good Ieere or two.

And from your iawbone,
Don Assinigo?

Shunfield, a Ieere, you have it.

I do confess a washing blow? but Snarle,
You that might play the third dog, for your teeth,
You have no money now?

No, nor no Mortgage.

Nor Band.

Nor Statute.

No, nor blushet Wax.

Nor you no Office, as I take it.

Cymbal,
A mighty Ieere.

Pox o'these true ieasts, I say.

He will turn the better ieerer.

Let Us upon him,
And if we cannot ieere him down in wit,

Let Us do it in noise.

Content.

Charge, man of war.

Lay him, abord.

We'll gi' him a broad side, first.

Where Is your venison, now?

Your red-Deer-pyes?

Wi' your baked Turkyes?

and your Partridges?

Your Phessants, and fat Swans?

Like you, turned Geese.

But such as will not keep your Capitol?

You were wont to have your Breams --

And Trouts sent in?

Fat Carps, and Salmons?

I, and now, and then,
An Emblem, o'your self, an o're-growne Pyke?

You are a Jack, Sir.

You have made a shift
To swallow twenty such poor Iacks ere now.

If he should come to feed upon poor- John?

Or turn pure Iack-a-Lent after all this?

Tut, he will live like a Gras-hopper --

On dew.

Or like a Bear, with licking his own claws.

I, If his dogs were away.

He Will eat them, first,
While they are fat.

Faith, and when they are gone,
Here Is nothing to be seen beyond.

Except
His kindred, Spiders, natives of the soil.

Dust, he will have enough here, to breed fleas.

But, by that time, he will have no blood to rear 'hem.

He will be as thin as a lantern, we shall see through him,

And his gut colon, tell his Intestina --

Rogues, Rascals (

He calls his dogs to his aid.

O! they but rise at mention of his tripes.

Let them alone, they do it not for him.

They bark, se defendendo.

Or for custom,
As commonly currres do, one for another.

Arm, arm you, Gentlemen Ieerers, the old Canter
Is coming in upon you, with his forces,
The Gentleman, that was the Canter.

Hence.

Away.

What is he?

stay not to ask questions.

He Is a flame.

A furnace.

A consumption,
Kills where he goes.

See! the whole Couy is scattered,
'Ware, 'ware the Hawks. I love to see him fly.

YOu see by this amazement, and distraction,
What your companions were, a poor, affrighted,
And guilty race of men, that dare to stand
No breath of truth: but conscious to themselves
Of their no-wit, or honesty, ran routed
At every Pannicke terror themselves bred.
Where else, as confident as sounding brass,
Their tinckling Captain, Cymbal, and the rest,
Dare put on any visor, to deride
The wretched: or with buffon license, jest
At whatsoever is serious, if not sacred.



Yes, and sent hither to restore your wits:
If your short madness, be not more then anger,
Conceived for your loss! which I return you.
See here, your Mortgage, Statute, Band, and Wax,
Without your Broker, come to abide with you:
And vindicate the Prodigal, from stealing
Away the Lady. Nay, Pecunia herself,
Is come to free him fairly, and discharge
All ties, but those of Love, unto her person,
To use her like a friend, not like a slave,
Or like an Idol. Superstition
Does violate the Deity it worships:
No less then scorn does. And believe it, brother
The use of things is all, and not the Store;
Surfeit, and fullness, have killed more then famine.
The Sparrow, with his little plumage, flies,
While the proud Peacocke, ouer-charg'd with pens,
Is feign to sweep the ground, with his grown train,
And load of feathers.

Wise, and honored brother!
None but a Brother, and sent from the dead,
As you are to me, could have altered me:
I thank my Destiny, that is so gracious.
Are there no pains, no Penalties decreed
From whence you come, to us that smother money,
In chests, and strangle her in bags.

O, mighty,
Intolerable fines, and mulcts impo'sd!
(Of which I come to warn you) forfeitures
Of whole estates, if they be known, and taken!

I thank you Brother for the light you have given me,
I will prevent 'hem all. First free my dogs,
Lest what I have done to them (and against Law)
Be a Premuniri, for by Magna Charta
They could not be committed, as close prisoners,
My learned Counsel tells me here, my Cook.
And yet he showed me, the way, first.

Who did? I?
I trench the liberty of the subjects?

Peace,
Picklocke, your Ghest, that Stentor, has infected you,
Whom I have safe enough in a wooden collar.

Next, I restore these servants to their Lady,
With freedom, heart of cheer, and countenance;
It is their year, and day of Iubilee.

We thank you, Sir.

And lastly, to my Nephew,
I give my house, goods, lands, all but my vices,
And those I go to cleanse; kissing this Lady
Whom I do give him too, and join their hands.

If the Spectators will join theirs, we thank 'hem.

And wish they may, as I, enjoy Pecunia.

And so Pecunia her self does wish,
That she may still be aid unto their uses,
Not slave unto their pleasures, or a Tyrant
Over their fair desires; but teach them all
The golden mean: the Prodigal how to live,
The sordid, and the covetous, how to dye,
That with sound mind; this safe frugality.

THus have you seen the Makers double scope,
To profit, and delight; wherein our hope
Is, though the clout we do not always hit,
It will not be imputed to his wit:
A Tree so tried, and bent, as 'twill not start.
Nor does he often crack a string of Art,
Though there may other accidents as strange
Happen, the weather of your looks may change,
Or some high wind of mis-conceit arise,
To cause an alteration in our Skies;
If so, we'are sorry that have so misspent
Our Time and Tackle, yet he'is confident,
And vow's the next fair day, he will have us shoot
The same match over for him, if you will come to it.

