A TALE OF A TUB.

A COMEDY composed By BEN: JOHNSON.

Inficeto est inficetior rure.

LONDON, Printed M.DC.XL.

NO State-affaires, nor any politic Club,
Pretend we in our Tale, here, of a Tub.
But acts of Clownes and Constables, to day
Stuff out the Scenes of our ridiculous Play.
A Coopers wit, or some such busy Spark,
Illumining the high Constable, and his Clarke.
And all the Neighborhood, from old Records,
Of antic Proverbs, drawn from Whitson-Lord's,
And their Authorities, at Wakes and Ales,
With country precedents, and old Wives Tales;
We bring you now, to show what different things
The Cotes of Clownes, are from the Courts of Kings.
NOw of my faith, old Bishop Valentine,
You' have brought us nipping weather: Februere
Does cut and sheare; your day, and diocese
Are very cold. All your Parishioners;
As well your Layicks, as your Quiristers,
Had need to keep to their warm Fether-beds,
If they be sped of loves: this is no season,
To seek new Makes in; though Sir Hugh of Pancrace,
Be hither come to Totten, on intelligence,
To the young Lord of the Manor, Squire Tripoly,
On such an errand as a Mistress is.
What, Squire! I say?

I should call him too:
Sir Peter Tub was his father, a Salt-peeter-man;
Who left his Mother, Lady Tub of Totten-
Court, here, to revell, and keep open house in;
With the young Squire her son, and's Governor Basket-
Hilts, both by sword, and dagger: Domine,
Armiger Tub, Squire Tripoly, Expergiscere.
I dare not call aloud, lest she should hear me;
And think I conjured up the spirither, son,
In Priests-lack- latin: O she is jealous
Of all mankind for him.

Chanon, is it you?

The Vicar of Pancrace, Squire Tub! wa' hoh!

I come, I stoop unto the call; Sir Hugh!

He knows my lure is from his Love: fair Awdrey,
The High Constables Daughter of Kentish Town, here Mr.
Tobias Turfe.

What news of him?

He has waked me,
An hour before I would, Sir. And my duty,
To the young worship of Totten-Court, Squire Tripoly;
Who has my heart, as I have his: your Mrs.
Is to be made away from you, this morning,
Saint Valentines day: there are a knot of Clownes,
The Counsel of Finsbury, so they are y-styl'd,
Met at her Fathers; all the wise of the hundred;
Old Basi' Clench of Hamsted, petty Constable;
In-and-In Medlay, Cooper of Islington,
And Headborough; with loud To-Pan the Tinker,
Or Mettall-man of Belsise, the Third-borough:
And D'ogenes Scriben, the great Writer of Chalcot.

And why all these?

Sir to conclude in Counsel,
A Husband, or a Make for Mrs. Awdrey;
Whom they have named, and pricked down, Clay of Kilborne,
A tough young fellow, and a Tile-maker.

And what must he do?

Cover her, they say:
And keep her warm Sir: Mrs. Awdrey Turfe,
Last night did draw him for her Valentine;
Which chance, it has so taken her Father, and Mother,
(Because themselves drew so, on Valentine's Eve
Was thirty year) as they will have her married
To day by any means; they have sent a Messenger
To Kilborne, post, for Clay; which when I knew,
I posted with the like to worshipful Tripoly,
The Squire of Totten: and my advise to cross it.

What is it Sir Hugh?

Where is your Governor Hilts?
Basquet must do it.

Basquet shall be called:
Hilts, can you see to rise?

Cham not blind Sir
With too much light.

Open your the other eye,
And view if it be day.

Che can spy that
At's little a hole, as another, through a Millstone.

He will have the last word, though he talk Bilke for it.

Bilke? what is that?

Why nothing, a word signifying
Nothing; and borrowed here to express nothing.

A fine device!

Yes, till we hear a finer.
What Is your device now, Chanon Hugh?

In private.
Lend it your ear; I will not trust the air with it;
Or scarce my Shire; my Cassock sha' not know it;
If I thought it did, I Will burn it.

That Is the way,
You have thought to get a new one,

Is It worth it?


Then hearken, and receive it.
This it is Sir, do you relish it?

If Hilts
Be close enough to carry it; there is all.

It i'no sand? nor Butter-milke? If It be,
Ich'am no zive or watring pot, to draw
Knots in your' casions. If you trust me, zo:
If not, praforme it your zelves. 'Cham no man's wife,
But resolute Hilts: you will vind me in the Buttry.

A testie Clown: but a tender Clown, as wool:
And melting as the Weather in a Thaw:
He Will weep you, like all April: But he' ull roar you
Like middle March before: He will be as mellow,
And tipsie too, as October: And as grave,
And bound up like a frost (with the new year)
In January; as rigid, as he is rusticke.

You know his nature, and describe it well;
I Will leave him to your fashioning.

Stay, Sir Hugh;
Take a good Angel with you, for your Guide:
And let this guard you home-ward, as the blessing,
To our devise.

I thank you Squires-worship,
Most humbly (for the next, for this I am sure of.)
O for a Quire of these voices, now,
To chime in a man's pocket, and cry chinke!
One does not chirpe: it makes no harmony.
Grave Justice Bramble, next must contribute;
His charity must offer at this wedding:
I Will bid more to the Basin, and the Bride-ale;
Although but one can bear away the Bride.
I smile to think how like a Lottery
These Weddings are. Clay has her in possession;
The Squire he hopes to circumvent the Tile-Kill:
And now, if Justice Bramble do come off,
It Is two to one but Tub may loose his botome.

Why, it is thirty year, eene as this day now:
Zin Valentines day, of all days cursin'd, look you;
And the zame day of the month, as this Zin Valentine,
Or I am vowly deceived.

That our High Constable,
Mr. Tobias Turfe, and his Dame were married.
I think you are right. But what was that Zin Valentine?
Did you ever know 'um, Good Man Clench? Cle. Zin Valentine,
He was a deadly Zin, and dwelt at High-gate,
As I have heard, but 't was avore my time:
He was a Cooper too, as you are. Medlay,
An' In-an-In: A woundy, brag young vellow:
As the port went o'hun, then, and in those days.

Did he not write his name, Sim Valentine?
Vor I have met no Sin in Finsbury books;
And yet I have writ 'hem six or seven times over.

OF you mun look for the nine deadly Sims,
IN the Church books, Doge'; not the 'high Constables;
Nor in the Counties: Zure, that same Zin Valentine,
He was a stately Zin: an' he were a Zin,
And kept 'brave house.

At the Cock and Hen, in High-gate.
You have 'fresh'd my rememory well in it! neighbor Pan:
He had a place, in last King Harrie's time,
Of sorting all the young couples; joining 'hem:
And putting 'hem together; which is, yet,
Praform'd, as on his day -- Zin Valentine;
As being the Zin of the shire, or the whole County:
I am old Rivet still, and bear a brain,
The Clench, the Varrier, and true Leach of Hamsted.

You are a shrewd antiquity, neighbor Clench!
And a great Guide to all the Parishes!
The very Bel-wether of the Hundred, here,
As I may zay. Mr. Tobias Turfe,
High Constable, would not miss you, for a' score ^nus,
When he doe' scourse of the great Charty to us.

What Is that, a Horse? Can scourse naught but a Horse?
I near read of hun, and that in Smith-veld Chartie:
IN the old Fabians Chronicles: nor I think
In any new. He may be a Giant there,
For I ought I know.

You should do well to study
Records, Fellow Ball, both Law and Poetry.

Why, all is but writing, and reading, is it Scriben?
An't be any more, it is mere cheating zure.
Vlat cheating: all your Law, and Poets too.

Mr. High Constable comes.

I Will zay't avore 'hun.

What Is that, makes you'all so merry, and loud, Sirs, ha?
I could have heard you to my privy walk.

A Contervarsie, 'twixt your two learned men here:
Annibal Puppy says, that Law and Poetry
Are both flat cheating; All Is but writing and reading,
He says, be it verse or prose.

I think in conzience,
He do' zay true? Who is it do thwart 'un, ha?

Why my friend Scriben, and't please your worship.

Who D'oge? my D'ogenes? a great Writer, marry!
He Will vace me down, me my self sometimes,
That verse goes upon veete, as you and I do:
But I can gi' 'un the hearing; zit me down;
And laugh at 'un; and to my self conclude,
The greatest Clerks, are not the wisest men
Ever. Here they' are both! What Sirs, disputin,
And holdin Arguments of verse, and prose?
And no green thing before the Door, that shows,
Or speaks a wedding?

Those were verses now,
Your worship spoke, and run upon vive feet.

Feet, vrom my mouth, D'oge? Leave your 'zurd uppinions:
And get me in some boughs.

Let 'hem have leaves first.
There Is nothing green but Bays, and Rosemary.

And they are too good for strewings, your Maids say.

You take up 'dority still, to vouch against me.
All the twelve smocks in the house, zur, are your Authors.
Get some fresh hay then, to lay underfoot:
Some Holly and Ivy, to make vine the posts:
Is It not Son Valentines day? and Mrs. Awdrey,
Your young Dame to be married? I wonder Clay
Should be so tedious: He Is to play Son Valentine!
And the Clown sluggard's not come fro' Kilborne yet?

Do you call your Son in Law Clown, and't please your worship?

Yes, and vor worship too; my neighbor Medlay.
A Midlesex Clown^ and one of Finsbury:
They were the first Colon's of the kingdom here:
The Primitory Colon's; my D'ogenes says.
Where Is D'ogenes, my Writer now? What were those
You told me, D'ogenes, were the first Colon's
OF the Country? that the Romans brought in here?

The Coloni. Sir, Colonus is an Inhabitant:
A Clown original: as you would zay a Farmer, a Tiller of the Earth,
Ere sin' the Romans planted their Colonie first,
Which was in Midlesex.

Why so, I thank you heartily, good D'ogenes, you have zertified me.
I had rather be an ancient Colon, (as they zay) a Clown of Midlesex:
A good rich Farmer, or high Constable.
I Would play hun 'gaine a Knight, or a good Squire;
Or Gentleman of any other County
IN the Kindome.

Out cept Kent, for there they landed
All Gentlemen, and came in with the Conqueror,
Mad Julius Caesar; who built Dover-Castle:
My Ancestor To Pan, beat the first Ketle-drum,
Avore 'hun, here vrom Dover on the March:
Which piece of monumentall copper hangs
Up, scourd, at Hammer-smith yet; for there they came
Over the Thames, at a low water mark;
Vore either London, I, or Kingston Bridge --
I doubt were kursind.

Zee, who is here: John Clay^
Zonne Valentine, and Bridegroom! have you zeene
Your Valentine-Bride yet, sin' you came? John Clay?

No wusse. Che lighted, I, but now in the yard:
Puppy have scarce unswadled my legs yet.

What? wispes'o' your wedding day, zonne? This is right
Originous Clay: and Clay of Kilborne too!
I would have had boots of this day, zure, zonne John.

I did it to save charges: we mun dance,
O this day, zure: and who can dance in boots?
No, I got on my best straw-coloured stockins,
And swaddeld 'hem over to zave charges; I.

And his new shamois Doublet too with points;
I like that yet: and his long sawsedge-hose,
Like the Commander of four smoking Tile-kils,
Which he is Captain of; Captain of Kilborne:
Clay with his hat turned up, of the leere side, too:
As if he would leap my Daughter yet ere night,
And spring a new Turfe to the old house:
Look, and the wenches have not vound un out;
And do parzent un, with a van of Rosemary,
And Bays; to vill a Bow-pot, trim the head
Of my best vore-horse: we shall all have Bride-laces,
Or points, I zee; my Daughter will be valiant;
And prove a very Mary Anbry in the business.

They zaid, your worship had sur'd her to Squire Tub
Of Totten-Court here; all the hundred rings on it.

A Tale of a Tub, Sir; a mere tale of a Tub.
Lend it no ear I pray you: The Squire Tub
Is a fine man, but he is too fine a man,
And has a Lady Tub too to his Mother:
I Will deal with none of these vine silken Tubs.
John Clay, and Cloath-breech for my money, and Daughter.
Here comes another old Boy too, vor his colors

Of all her milk money, this Winter Quarter;
Old Father Rosin, the chief Minstrell here:
Chief Minstrell too of High gate: she has hired him
And all, his two Boys for a day and a half,
And now they come for Ribbanding, and Rosemary;
Give 'hem enough Girls, gi' 'hem enough, and take it
Out in his tunes anon.

I Will have Tom Tiler,
For our John Clay's sake, and the Tile kills, zure.

And I the jolly Joyner, for mine own sake.

I Will have the joviall Tinker for To. Pans sake.

We Will all be jovy this day, vor son Valentine.
My sweet son John's sake.

There Is another reading now:
My Mr. reads it Son, and not Sin Valentine.

Nor Zim: And he is in the right: He is high Constable.
And who should read above un, or avore 'hun?

Son John shall bid us welcome all, this day:
We Will zerve under his colors: Lead the troop John,
And Puppy; see the Bells ring. Press all noises
Of Finsbury, in our name; D'ogenes Scriben
Shall draw a score of warrants vor the business.
Does any wight parzent her Majesty's person,
This Hundred, 'bove the high Constable?

No, no.

Use our Authority then, to the utmost on it.

So, you are sure Sir to prevent 'hem all;
And throw a block in the Bride-groomes way, John Clay,
That he will hardly leap ore.

I conceive you,
Sir Hugh; as if your Rhetoric would say,
Whereas the Father of her is a Turfe,
A very superficies of the earth;
He aims no higher, then to match in Clay;
And there has pitched his rest.

Right Justice Bramble;
You have the winding wit, compassing all.

Subtle Sir Hugh, you now are in the wrong,
And err with the whole Neighborhood, I must tell you;
For you mistake my name. Justice Preamble
I write my self; which with the ignorant Clownes, here
(Because of my profession of the Law,
And place of the peace) is taken to be Bramble.
But all my warrants Sir, do run Preamble:
Richard Preamble.

Sir I thank you for it.
That your good worship, would not let me run
Longer in error but would take me up thus --

You are my learned, and canonick neighbor:
I would not have you stray; but the incorrigible
Knot-headed beast, the Clownes, or Constables,
Still let them graze; eat Sallads; chew the Cud:
All the Towne-musicke will not move a log.

The Beetle and Wedges will, where you will have 'hem.

True, true Sir Hugh, here comes Miles Metaphore,
My Clarke: He is the man shall carry it, Chanon,
By my instructions.

He will do it ad unguem,
Miles Metaphore: He is a pretty fellow.

I love not to keep shadows, or halfe-wits,
To foil a business. Metaphore! you have seen
A King ride forth in state.

Sir that I have:
King Edward our late Liege, and sovereign Lord:
And have set down the pomp.

Therefore I asked you.
Have you observed the Messengers of the Chamber?
What habits they were in?

Yes; Minor Coats.
Unto the Guard, a Dragon, and a Greyhound,
For the supporters of the Arms.

Well marked;
You know not any of 'hem?

Here Is one dwells
In Maribone.

Have you acquaintance with him?
To borrow his coat an hour?

Or but his badge,
'Twill serve: A little thing he wears on his breast.

His coat, I say, is of more authority:
Borrow his coat for an hour. I do love
To do all things compleately, Chanon Hugh;
Borrow his coat, Miles Metaphore, or nothing.

The Taberd of his office, I will call it,
Or the Coat Armor of his place: and so
Insinuate with him by that Trope --.

I know your powers of Rhetoric, Metaphore.
Fetch him off in a fine figure for his coat I say.

I Will take my leave Sir of your worship too:
Because I may expect the issue anon.

Stay my diviner Counsel, take your fee;
We that take fees, allow 'hem to our Counsel;
And our prime learned Counsel, double fees:
There are a brace of Angels to support you
IN your foot-walke this frost, for fear of falling;
Or spraying of a point of Matrimony,
When you come at it.

IN your worships service;
That the exploit is done, and you possessed
Awdrey Turfe --

I like your project.

And I, of this effect of two to one;
It works in my pocket, against the Squire,
And his half bottom here, of half a piece:
Which was not worth the stepping ore the style for:
His Mother has quite marred him: Lady Tub,
She Is such a vessel of faeces: all dried earth!
Terra damnata, not a drop of salt!
Or Peeter in her! All her Nitre is gone.

Is the Nag ready Marten? call the Squire.
This frosty morning we will take the air,
About the fields: for I do mean to be
Some-bodies Valentine, in my Velvet Gown,
This morning, though it be but a beggar-man.
Why stand you still, and do not call my son?

Madam, if he had couched with the Lamb,
He had no doubt been stirring with the Lark:
But he sat up at Play, and watched the Cock,
Till his first warning chid him off to rest.
Late Watchers are no early Wakers, Madam;
But if your Ladyship will have him called --.

Will have him called? Wherefore did I, Sir, bid him
Be called, you Weazell, Vermin of an Huisher?
You will return your wit to your first style
Of Marten Polcat, by these stinking tricks,
If you do use 'hem: I shall no more call you
Pol-marten, by the title of a Gentleman,


I am gone.

Be quick then,
IN your come off: and make amends you Stote!
Was ever such a Full-mart for an Huisher,
To a great worshipful Lady, as my self;
Who, when I heard his name first, Martin Poleat,
A stinking name, and not to be pronounced

Young, pretty and handsome; being then I say,
A Basket-Carrier, and a man condemned
To the Salt-peeter works; made it my suit
To Mr. Peeter Tub, that I might change it;
And call him as I do now, by Pol-marten,
To have it sound like a Gentleman in an Office,
And made him mine own Foreman, daily waiter,
And he to serve me thus! Ingratitude!
Beyond the Coursenes yet of any Clownage,
Shown to a Lady! what now, is he stirring?

Stirring betimes out of his bed, and ready.

And comes he then?

No Madam, he is gone.

Gone? whither? ask the Porter: Where Is he gone?

I met the Porter, and have asked him for him;
He says he let him forth an hour ago.

An hour ago! what business could he have,
So early? where is his man, grave Basket Hilts?
His Guide, and Governor?

Gone with his Master.

Is he gone too? O that same surly knave,
Is his right hand: and leads my son amiss.
He has carried him to some drinking match, or other:
Pol-marten, I will call you so again;
I Am friends with you now. Go get your horse, and ride
To all the Towns about here, where his haunts are;
And cross the fields to meet, and bring me word;
He cannot be gone far, being a foot.
Be curious to inquire him: and bid Wispe
My woman come, and wait on me. The love
We Mothers bear our Sons, we have bought with pain,
Makes us often view them, with too careful eyes,
And over-looke 'hem with a jealous fear,
Out-fitting Mothers.

How now Wispe? Have you
A Valentine yet: I Am taking the air to choose one.

Fate send your Ladyship a fit one then.

What kind of one is that?

A proper man,
To please your Ladyship.

Out of that vanity,
That takes the foolish eye: Any poor creature,
Whose want may need my alms, or courtesy;
I rather wish; so Bishop Valentine,
Left us example to do deeds of Charity;
To feed the hungry; cloth the naked, visit
The weak, and sick; to entertain the poor;
And give the dead a Christian Funeral;
These were the works of piety he did practice,
And bad us imitate; not look for Lovers,
Or handsome Images to please our senses.
I pray thee Wispe, deal freely with me now:
We are alone, and may be merry a little:
Though art none of the Court-glories; nor the wonders
For wit, or beauty in the City: tell me,
What man would satisfy thy present fancy?
Had thy ambition leave to choose a Valentine,
Within the Queens Dominion, so a subject.

Yo' have gi' me a large scope, Madam, I confess,
And I will deal with your Ladyship sincerely:
I Will utter my whole heart to you. I would have him,
The bravest, richest, and the properest man
A Tailor could make up; or all the Poets,
With the Perfumers: I would have him such,
As not another woman, but should spite me:
Three City Ladies should run mad for him:
And Countri-Madams infinite.

You Would spare me,
And let me hold my wits?

I should with you --
For the young Squire, my Masters sake: dispense
A little; but it should be very little.
Then all the Court-wives I Would have jealous of me;
As all their husbands jealous of them:
And not a Lawyers Pusse of any quality,
But lick her lips, for a snatch in the Term time.

Come,
Let Us walk: we will hear the rest, as we go on:
You are this morning in a good vein, Dido:
Would I could be as merry. My sons absence
Troubles me not a little: though I seek
These ways to put it off; which will not help:
Care that is entered, once into the breast,
Will have the whole possession, ere it rest.

ZOnne Clay, cheer up, the better leg avore:
This is a veat is once done, and no more.

And then it is done vor ever, as they say.

Right! vor a man have his hour, and a dog his day.

True neighbor Medlay, yo' are still In-and-In.

I would be Mr. Constable, if' ch' could win.

I zay, John Clay, keep still on his old gate:
Wedding, and hanging, both go at a rate.

Well said To-Pan: you have still the hap to hit
The nail of the head at a close: I think there ne ver
Marriage was managed with a more avisement,
Then was this marriage, though I say it, that should not;
Especially 'gain 'mine own flesh, and blood;
My wedded Wife. Indeed my Wife would have had
All the young Batchelers and Maids, forsooth,
OF the zixe Parishes hereabout: But I
Cried none, sweet Sybil: none of that gear, I:
It would lick zalt, I told her, by her leave.
No, three, or voure our wise, choice honest neighbors:
Vpstantiall persons: men that have borne office:
And mine own Family, would be enough
To eat our dinner. What? Dear meate's a theife:
I know it by the Butchers, and the Mercat-volke;
Hum drum I cry. No halfe-Oxe in a Pie:
A man that is bid to Bride-ale, if he have cake,
And drink enough, he need not veare his stake.

It Is right: he has spoke as true as a Gun; believe it.

Come Sybil, come: Did not I tell you of this?
This pride, and muster of women would mar all?
Six women to one Daughter, and a Mother!
The Queen (God save her) have no more her self.

Why, if you keep so many, Mr. Turfe,
Why, should not all present our service to her?

Your service? good! I think you will write to her shortly,
Your very loving and obedient Mother.

Come, send your Maids off, I will have 'hem sent
Home again wife: I love no trains of Kent,
Or Christendom, as they say.

We will not back,
And leave our Dame.

Why should her worship lack
Her tail of Maids, more then you do of men?

What, mutinin Madge?

Zend back your C'lons again.
And we will vollow.

Else we will guard our Dame.

I have zet the nest of waspes all on a flame.

Come, you are such another Mr. Turfe:
A Clod you should be called, of a high Constable:
To let no music go before your child,
To Church, to cheer her heart up this cold morning.

You are for Father Rosin, and his consort
Of fidling Boys, the great Feats, and the less:
Because you have entertained 'hem all from High-gate.
To show your pomp, you would have your Daughter, and Maids
Dance ore the fields like Faies, to Church this frost?
I Will have no rondels, I, in the Queens paths;
Let 'un scrape the Gut at home, where they have filled it
At afternoon.

I Will have 'hem play at dinner.

She is in the right, Sir; vor your wedding dinner
Is starved without the Music.

If the Pies
Come not in piping hot, you have lost that Proverb.

I yield to truth: wife are you sussified?

A right good man! when he knows right, he loves it.

And he will know it, and shew't too by his place
Of being high Constable, if no where else.

Well over-taken, Gentlemen! I pray you,
Which is the Queens High Constable among you?

The tallest man: who should be else, do you think?

It is no matter what I think, young Clown:
Your answer favors of the Cart.

How? Cart? and Clown? Do you know whose teame you speak to?


No: nor I care not: Whose Jade may you be?

Jade? Cart? and Clown? O for a lash of whip-cord!
Three-knotted coard!

Do you mutter? Sir, snorle this way;
That I may hear, and answer what you say,
With my schoole-dagger, 'bout your Costard Sir.
Look to it, young growse: I Will lay it on, and sure;
Take It off who is wull.

Nay, pray you Gentleman --.

Go too: I will not bate him an ace on it.
What? Rowle-powle? Maple-face? All fellows?

Do you hear friend, I would wish you, vor your good,
Tie up your brended Bitch there, your dun rustie
Pannyer-hilt poinard: and not vex the youth
With showing the teeth of it. We now are going
To Church, in way of matrimony, some on us:
Tha' rung all in a'ready. If it had not,
All the horn beasts are grazing in this close,
Sold not have pull' me hence, till this Ash-plant
Had rung noone of your pate, Mr. Broome-beard.

That would I feign zee, quoth the blind George
Of Holloway: Come Sir.

O their naked weapons!

For the passion of man, hold Gentleman, and Puppy.

Murder, O Murder!

O my Father, and Mother!

Husband, what do you mean? Son Clay for Gods sake --

I charge you in the Queens name, keep the peace.

Tell me of no Queen, or Keysar: I must have
A leg, or a hanch of him, ere I go.

But zir,
You must obey the Queens high Officers.

Why must I, Good Man Must?

You must, an' you wull.

Gentleman, I Am here for fault, high Constable --

Are you zo? what then?

I pray you Sir put up
Your weapons; do, at my request: For him,
On my authority, he shall lie by the heels,
Verbatim continente, an' I live.

Out on him for a knave, what a dead fright
He has put me into? Come Awdrey, do not shake.

But is not Puppy hurt? nor the the other man?

No Bun; but had not I cried Murder, I wusse --

Sweet Good Man Clench, I pray you revise my Mr.
I may not zit in the stocks, till the wedding be past
Dame. Mrs. Awdrey: I shall break the Bride-cake else.

Zomething must be, to save authority, Puppy.

Husband --

And Gossip --

Father --

'Treat
me not.
It is in vain. If he lie not by the heels,
I Will lie there for 'hun. I Will teach the Hine,
To carry a tongue in his head, to his subperiors.

This's a wise Constable! where keeps he school?

In Kentish Town, a very survere man.

But as survere as he is; Let me Sir tell him,
He sha' not lay his man by the hee^es for this.
This was my quarrel: And by his office leave,
If It carry 'hun for this, it shall carry double;
Vor he shall carry me too.

Breach of man!
He is my chattell, mine own hired goods:
An' if you do abet 'un in this matter,
I Will clap you both by the heels, ankle to ankle.

You Will clap a dog of wax as soon, old Blurt?
Come, spare not me, Sir; I am no man's wife:
I care not, I, Sir, not three skips of a Lowse for you,
And you were ten tall Constables, not I.

Nay, pray you Sir, be not angry; but content:
My man shall make you, what amends you will ask 'hun.

Let 'hun mend his manners then, and know his betters:
It Is all I ask 'hun: and 'twill be his own;
And's Masters too, another day. Che vore 'hun.

As right as a Club, still. Zure this angry man
Speaks very near the mark, when he is pleased.

I thank you Sir, an' I meet you at Kentish Town,
I have the courtesy of hundred for you.

Gramercy, good high Constables Hine. But hear you?
Mass: Constable, I have other manner of matter,
To bring you about, then this. And so it is,
I do belong to one of the Queens Captains;
A Gent'man of the Field, one Captain Thum's:
I know not, whether you know 'hun, or no: It may be
You do, and 't may be you do not again.

No, I assure you on my Constable-ship,
I do not know 'hun.

Nor I neither in faith.
It skils not much; my Captain, and my self,
Having occasion to come riding by, here,
This morning, at the corner of Saint John's wood,
Some mile of this Town, were set upon
By a sort of country fellows: that not only
Beat us, but robbed us, most sufficiently;
And bound us to our behavior, hand and foot;
And so they left us. Now, Don Constable,
I am to charge you in her Majesty's name,
As you will answer it at your apperill,
That forthwith you raise Hue and Cry in the Hundred,
For all such persons as you can dispect,
By the length and breadth, of your office: vor I tell you,
The loss is of some value, therefore look to it.

As Fortune mend me, now, or any office
Of a thousand pound, if I know what to zay,
Would I were dead; or vaire hanged up at Tiburne,
If I do know what course to take; or how
To turn my self; just at this time too, now,
My Daughter is to bemarried: I Will but go
To Pancridge Church, hard by, and return instantly,
And all my Neighborhood shall go about it.

Tut, Pancridge me no Pancridge, if you let it
Slip, you will answer it, and your Cap be of wool;
Therefore take heed, you will feel the smart else, Constable.

Nay, good Sir stay. Neighbors! what think you of this?

Faith, Man --. Odd precious woman, hold your tongue;
And mind your pigs of the spit at home; you must
Have Ore in every thing. Pray you Sir, what kind
Of fellows were they?

Theev's kind, I have told you.

I mean, what kind of men?

Men of our make.

Nay, but with patience, Sir, we that are Officers
Must 'quire the special marks, and all the tokens
Of the despected parties, or perhaps -- else,
Be nere the nere of our purpose in 'prehending 'hem.
Can you tell, what 'parrell any of them wore?

Troth no: there were so many of hun, all like
So one another: Now I remember me,
There was one busy fellow, was their Leader;
A blunt squat swad, but lower then your self,
He' had on a Lether Doublet, with long points.
And a pair of pin'd-up breech's, like pudding bags:
With yellow stockings, and his hat turned up
With a silver Claspe, on his leere side.

By these
Marks it should be John Clay, now bless the man!

Peace, and be naught: I think the woman be phrensick.

John Clay? what is he, good Mistress?

He that shall be
My husband --

How! your husband, pretty one?

Yes, I shall anon be married: That Is he.

Passion of me, undone!

Bless Masters son!

O you are well 'prehended: know you me Sir?

No's my record: I never zaw you avore.

You did not? where were your eyes then? out at washing?

What should a man zay? who should he trust
In these days? Hark you John Clay, if you have
Done any such thing, tell troth, and shame the Devil.

Vaith do: my Gossip Turfe zaies well to you John.

Speak man, but do not convesse, nor be avraid.

A man is a man, and a beast's a beast, look to it.

IN the name of men, or beasts! what do you do?
Hare the poor fellow out on his five wits,
And seven senses? Do not weep John Clay.
I swear the poor wretch is as guilty from it,
As the Child was, was borne this very morning.

No, as I am a kyrsin soul, would I were hanged
If ever I -- alas I! would I were out
Of my life, so I would I were, and in again --

Nay, Mrs. Awdrey will say nay to that.
No, In-and-out? an' you were out of your life,
How should she do for a husband? who should fall
Aboard of her then, Ball? He Is a Puppy?
No; Hanniball has no breeding: well! I say little;
But hitherto all goes well, pray it prove no better.

Come Father; I would we were married: I am a cold.

Well, Mr. Constable, this your fine Groom here,
Bridegroom, or what Groom else, soere he be,
I charge him with the felony; and charge you
To carry him back forthwith to Paddington,
Unto my Captain, who stays my return there:
I am to go to the next Justice of peace,
To get a warrant to raise Huy and Cry,
And bring him, and his fellows all before 'hun.
Fare you well Sir, and look to 'hun I charge you,
As yo'll answer it. Take heed; the business
If you defer, may prejudicial you
More then you thinke-for, zay I told you so.

Here Is a Bride-ale indeed! Ah zonne John, zonne Clay!
I little thought you would have proved a piece
Of such false metal.

Father, will you believe me?
Would I might never stir in my new shoes,
If ever I would do so voule a fact.

Well Neighbors, I do charge you to assist me
With 'hun to Paddington. Be he a true man, so:
The better for 'hun. I will do mine office,
An' he were my own begotten a thousand times.

Why, do you hear man? Husband? Mr. Turfe!
What shall my Daughter do? Puppy, stay here.

Mother, I Will go with you, and with my Father.

Nay, stay sweet Mrs. Awdrey: here are none
But one friend (as they zay) desires to speak
A word, or two, cold with you: How do you veele
Your self this frosty morning?

What have you
To do to ask, I pray you? I am a cold.

It seems you are hot, good Mrs. Awdrey.

You lie; I am as cold as Ice is: Feel else.

Nay, you have coold my courage: I am past it,
I have done feeling with you.

Done with me?
I do defy you. So I do, to say
You have done with me: you are a ^awcy Puppy.

O you mistake! I meant not as you mean.

Meant you not knavery; Puppy? No: not I.
Clay meant you all the knavery, it seems,
Who rather, then he would be married to you,
Chose to be wedded to the Gallows first.

I thought he was a dissembler; he would prov^
A slippery Merchant in the frost. He might
Have married one first, and have been hanged after,
If he had had a mind to it. But you men,
Fie on you.

Mrs. Awdrey, can you vind,
I your heart to fancy Puppy? me poor Ball?

You are disposed to jeere one, Mr. Hanniball.


Put on thy hat, I look for no despect.
Where Is thy Master?

Marry, he is gone
With the picture of despair, to Paddington.

Pr'y thee run after 'hun, and tell 'hun he shall
Find out my Captain, lodged at the red- Lion
In Paddington; that is the Inn. Let 'un ask
Vor Captain Thum's; And take that for thy pains:
He may seek long enough else. Hi^ thee again.

Yes, Sir you will look to Mrs. Bride the while?

That I will: prithee haste.

What Puppy? Puppy?

Sweet Mrs. Bride, He Will come again presently.
Here was no subtle device to get a wench.
This Chanon has a brave pate of his own!
A shaven pate! And a right monger, y' vaith!
This was his plot! I follow Captain Thum's?
We robbed in Saint John's wood? IN my the other hose!
I laugh, to think what a fine fools finger they have
O this wise Constable, in pricking out
This Captain Thum's to his neighbors: you shall see
The Tile-man too set fire on his own Kill,
And leap into it, to save himself from hanging.
You talk of a Bride-ale, here was a Bride-ale broke,
IN the nick. Well: I must yet dispatch this Bride,
To mine own master, the young Squire, and then
My task is done. Gen'woman! I 'have in sort
Done you some wrong, but now I Will do you what right
I can: It Is true, you are a proper woman;
But to be cast away on such a Clowne-pipe
As Clay; me thinks, your friends are not so wise
As nature might have made 'hem; well, go too:
There Is better fortune coming toward you,
A^' you do not deject it. Take a voole's
Counsel, and do not stand in your own light.
It may prove better then you think for: Look you.

Alas Sir, what is it you would have me do?
I Would feign do all for the best, if I knew how.

Forsake not a good turn, when it is offered you;
Fair Mistress Awdrey, that is your name, I take it.

No Mistress, Sir, my name is Awdrey.

Well, so it is, there is a bold young Squire,
The blood of Totten, Tub, and Tripoly --.

Squire Tub, you mean? I know him: he knows me too.

He is in love with you: and more, he is mad for you.

I, so he told me: in his wits, I think.
But he is too fine for me; and has a Lady
Tub to his Mother. Here he comes himself!

O you are a trusty Governor!

What ailes you?
You do not know when yo'are well, I think:
You Would have the Calfe with the white face, Sir, would you?
I have her for you here; what would you more?

Quietness, Hilts, and hear no more of it.

No more of it, quoth you? I do not care,
If some on us had not heard so much often,
I tell you true; A man must carry, and vetch,
Like Bungy's dog for you.

What Is he?

A Spaniel.
And scarce be spit in the mouth for it. A good Dog
Deserves, Sir, a good bone, of a free Master:
But, an' your turns be served, the devil a bit
You care for a man after, ere a Lard of you.
Like will to like, y-faith, quoth the scab'd Squire
To the mangy Knight, when both met in a dish
Of buttered vish. One bad, there is nere a good;
And not a barrel better Hering among you.

Nay Hilts! I pray thee grow not fram-pull now.
Turn not the bad Cow, after thy good soape.
Our plot has hitherto taken good effect:
And should it now be troubled, or stopped up,
'Twould prove the utter ruin of my hopes.
I pray thee haste to Pancridge, to the Chanon:
And gi' him notice of our good success;
Will him that all things be in readiness.
Fair Awdrey, and my self, will cross the fields,
The nearest path. Good Hilts, make thou some haste,
And meet us on the way. Come gentle Awdrey.

Vaith, would I had a few more geances on it:
An' you say the word, send me to Jericho.
Out-cept a man were a Post-horse, I have not known
The like on it; yet, an' he had kind words,
'Twould never irke 'hun. But a man may break
His heart out in these days, and get a flap
With a fox-taile, when he has done. And there is all.

Nay, say not so Hilts: hold thee; there are Crowns --
My love bestows on thee, for thy reward.
If Gold will please thee, all my land shall drop
In bounty thus, to recompense thy merit.

Tut, keep your land, and your gold too Sir: I
Seek neither -- another of 'hun. Learn to get
More: you will know to spend that zum you have
Early enough: you are assured of me.
I love you too too well, to live of the spoil:
For your own sake, were there were no worse then I.
All is not Gold that glisters: I Will to Pancridge.

See, how his love does melt him into Tears!
An honest faithful servant is a Jewel.
Now the adventurous Squire has time, and leisure,
To ask his Awdrey how she does, and hear
A grateful answer from her. She not speaks:
Has the proud Tiran, Frost, usurped the seat
Of former beauty in my Loves fair cheek;
Staining the rose at tincture of her blood,
With the dull die of blew-congealing cold?
No, sure the weather dares not so presume
To hurt an object of her brightness. Yet,
The more I view her, she but looks so, so.
Ha? gi' me leave to search this mystery!
O now I have it: Bride, I know your grief;
The last nights cold, has bred in you such horror
Of the assigned Bride-groomes constitution,
The Kilborne Clay-pit; that frost-bitten marle;
That lump in courage: melting cake of Ice;
That the conceit thereof has almost killed thee.
But I must do thee good wench, and refresh thee.

You are a merry man, Squire Tub, of Totten!
I have heard much of your words, but not of your deeds.

Thou say true, sweet; IN have been too slack in deeds.

Yet, I was never so straight-lac'd to you, Squire.

Why, did you ever love me, gentle Awdrey?

Love you? I cannot tell: I must hate no body,
My Father says.

Yes, Clay, and Kilburne; Awdrey,
You must hate them.

It shall be for your sake then.

And for my sake, shall yield you that gratuitie.



What are those Awdrey?

Nay, I cannot tell.
My Mother said, zure, if you married me,
You Would make me a Lady the first week: and put me
In, I know not what, the very day.

What was it?
Speak gentle Awdrey, thou shall have it yet.

A velvet dressing for my head, it is,
They say will make one brave: I will not know
Besse Moale, nor Margery Turne-up: I will look
Another way upon 'hem, and be proud.

Troth I could wish my wench a better wi^;
But what she wants there, her face supplies.
There is a pointed luster in her eye
Has shot quite through me, and has hit my heart:
And thence it is, I first received the wound,
That ranckles now, which only she can cure.
Feign would I work my self, from this conceit;
But, being flesh, I cannot. I must love her,
The naked truth is: and I will go on,
Were it for nothing, but to cross my Rivall's.
Come Awdrey: I am now resolved to have thee.

Nay, do it quickly, Miles; why shak'st thou man?
Speak but his name: I Will second thee my self.

What is his name?

Squire Tripoly or Tub.
Any thing --

Squire Tub, I do arrest you
IN the Queens Majesty's name, and all the Councels.

Arrest me, Varlet?

Keep the peace I charge you.

Are you there, Justice Bramble? where is your warrant?

The warrant is directed here to me,
From the whole table; wherefore I would pray you
Be patient Squire, and make good the peace.

Well, at your pleasure, Justice. I am wronged:
Sirrah, what are you have arrested me?

He is a Pursy'vant at Arms, Squire Tub.

I am a Purs'yvant, see, by my Coat else.

Well Purs'yvant, go with me: I Will give you bail.

Sir he may take no bail. It is a warrant,
In special from the Council, and commands
Your personal appearance. Sir, your weapon
I must require: And then deliver you
A Prisoner to this officer, Squire Tub.
I pray you to conceive of me no other,
Then as your friend, and neighbor. Let my person
Be severed from my office in the fact,
And I am clear. Here Purs'yvant, receive him
Into your hands; And use him like a Gentleman.

I thank you Sir: But whither must I go now?

Nay, that must not be told you, till you come
Unto the place assigned by his instructions.
I Will be the Maidens Convoy to her father,
For this time, Squire.

I thank you Mr. Bramble.
I doubt, or fear, you will make her the balance
To weigh your Justice in. Pray ye do me right,
And lead not her, at least out of the way.
Justice is blind, and having a blind Guide,
She may be apt to slip aside.

I Will see to her.

I see my wooing will not thrive. Arrested!
As I had set my rest up, for a wife?
And being so fair for it, as I was. --. Well, fortune,
Thou art a blind Bawd, and a Beggar too,
To cross me thus; and let my only Rival,
To get her from me? That Is the spite of spights.
But most I muse at, is, that I, being none
OF the Court, am sent for thither by the Council!
My heart is not so light, as't was IN the morning.

You mean to make a Hoiden, or a Hare
O me, to hunt Counter thus, and makes these doubles:
And you mean no such thing, as you send about?
Where Is your sweetheart now, I marle?

Oh Hilts!

I know you of old! nere halt before a Criple.
Will you have a Cawdle? where is your grief, Sir? speak?

Do you hear friend? Do you serve this Gentleman?

How then, Sir? what if I do? peradventure yea:
Peraventure nay, what is that to you Sir? Say.

Nay, pray you Sir, I meant no harm in truth:
But this good Gentleman is arrested.

How?
Say me that again.

Nay Basket, never storm;
I am arrested here, upon command
From the Queens Council; and I must obey.

You say Sir very true, you must obey.
An honest Gentleman, in faith!

He must?

But that which most tormenteth me, is this,
That Justice Bramble has got hence my Awdrey.

How? how? stand by a little, sirrah, you
With the badge of your breast. Let Us know Sir what you are?

I am Sir (pray you do not look so terribly)
A Purs'yvant.

A Purs'yvant? your name Sir?

My name Sir --

What is it? speak?

Miles Metaphor;
And Justice Preambles Clarke.

What says he?

Pray you,
Let us alone. You are a Purs'yvant?

No faith, Sir, would I might never stir from you,
IN is made a Purs'yvant against my will.

Ha! and who made you one? tell true, or my will
Shall make you nothing, instantly.

Put up
Your frightfull Blade; and your dead-doing look,
And I shall tell you all.

Speak then the truth,
And the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

My Master, Justice Bramble, hearing your Master,
The Squire Tub, was coming on this way,
With Mrs. Awdrey, the high Constables Daughter;
Made me a Purs'yvant: and gave me warrant
To arrest him, so that he might get the Lady,
With whom he is gone to Pancridge, to the Vicar,
Not to her Fathers. This was the device,
Which I beseek you, do not tell my Master.

O wonderful! well Basket, let him rise:
And for my free escape, forge some excuse.
I Will post to Paddington, to acquaint old Turfe,
With the whole business, and so stop the marriage.

Well, bless thee: I do wish thee grace, to keep
Thy Masters secrets, better, or be hanged.

I thank you, for your gentle admonition.
Pray you, let me call you Godfather hereafter.
And as your God-sonne Metaphore I promise,
To keep my Masters privities, sealed up
IN the valleys of my trust, locked close for ever,
Or let me be trussed up at Tiburne shortly.

Thine own wish, save, or choke thee; Come away.

PAssion of me, was ever man thus crossed?
All things run Arsie-Varsie; upside down.
High Constable! Now by our Lady of Walsingham.
I had rather be marked out Tom Scavinger.
And with a shovell make clean the high ways,
Then have this office of a Constable,
And a high Constable! The higher charge
It brings more trouble, more vexation with it.
Neighbors, good neighbors, 'vize me what to do:
How we shall bear us in this Huy and Cry.
We cannot find the Captain; no such man
Lodged at the Lion, nor came thither hurt.
The morning we have spent in privy search;
And by that means the Bride-ale is differr'd;
The Bride, she is left alone in Puppie's charge;
The Bridegroom goes under a pair of sureties;
And held of all as a respected person.
How should we bussle forward? Gi' some counsel,
How to bestirre our stumps in these cross ways.

Faith Gossip Turfe, you have, you say, Remission,
To comprehend all such, as are dispected:
Now, would I make another privy search
Through this Town, and then you have zearch'd two towns.

Masters, take heed, let us not vind too many:
One's enough to stay the Hang-mans stomach.
There is John Clay, who is yvound already;
A proper man: A Tile-man by his trade:
A man as one would zay, molded in clay:
As spruce as any neighbors child among you:
And he (you zee) is taken on conspition,
And two, or three (they zay) what call you 'hem?
Zuch as the Justices of Coram nobis
Grant -- (I forget their names, you have many on 'hem,
Mr. High Constable they come to you.)
I have it at my tongues end -- Cunni-borroughes,
To bring him straight avore the zessions house.

O you mean warrens, neighbor, do you not?

I, I, thick same! you know 'un well enough.

Too well, too well; would I had never known 'hem.
We good Vree-holders cannot live in quiet,
But every hour new purcepts, Huy's and Cry's,
Put us to requisitions night and day:
What should a man zay, should we leave the zearch?
I am in danger, to reburse as much
As he was robbed on; I, and pay his hurts,
If I should vollow it, all the good cheer
That was provided; for the wedding dinner
Is spoiled, and lost. Oh there are two vat pigs,
A zindging by the vi^r: Now by Saint Tomy,
Too good to eat, but on a wedding day;
And then, a Goose will bid you all, Come cut me.
Zun Clay, zun Clay (for I must call thee so)
Be of good comfort; take my Muckinder;
And dry thine eyes. If thou be true, and honest;
And if thou find'st thy conscience clear vrom it,
Pluck up a good heart, we will do well enough.
If not, confess a truths name. But in faith
I durst be sworn upon all holy books,
John Clay would nere commit a Robbery
On his own head.

No; Truth is my rightful Judge:
I have kept my hands, here hence, fro' evil speaking,
Lying, and slandering; and my tongue from stealing.
He do not live this day can say, John Clay
I have zeene thee, but in the way of honesty.

Faith neighbor Medlay, I durst be his borough,
He would not look a true man in the vace.

I take the town to concord, where I dwell,
All Kilburne be my witness; If I were not
Begot in bashfulnesse, brought up in shamefac'tnesse:
Let 'un bring a dog, but to my vace, that can
Zay, I have beat 'hun, and without a vault;
Or but a cat, will swear upon a book,
I have as much as zet a vier her tail;
And I Will give him, or her a crown for 'mends.
But to give out, and zay, I have robbed a Captain!
Receive me at the latter day, if I
Ere thought of any such matter; or could mind it --.

No John, you are come of too good personage;
I think my Gossip Clench, and Mr. Turfe
Both think, you would ra 'tempt no such voule matter.

But how unhappily it comes to pass!
Just on the wedding day! I cry me mercy:
I had almost forgot the Huy and Cry:
Good neighbor Pan, you are the Third-burrow,
And D'ogenes Scriben, you my learned Writer,
Make out a new purcept -- Lord, for thy goodness,
I had forgot my Daughter, all this while;
The idle knave has brought no news from her.
Here comes the sneaking Puppy; What Is the news?
My heart! my heart! I fear all is not well,
Some things mishap'd, that he is come without her.

Oh, where is my Master? my Master? my Master?

Thy Master? what would with thy Master, man?
There Is thy Mr. Tur. What Is the matter Puppy?

Oh Master! oh Dame! oh Dame! oh Master!

What sai'st thou to thy Master, or thy Dame?

Oh John Clay! John Clay! John Clay!

What of John Clay?

Luck grant he bring not news he shall be hanged.

The world forfend, I hope, it is not so well.

Oh Lord! oh me! what shall I do? poor John!

Oh John Clay! John Clay! John Clay!

Alas,
That ever I was borne! I will not stay by it,
For all the Tiles in Kilburne.

What of Clay?
Speak Puppy, what of him?

He has lost, he has lost.

For luck sake speak, Puppy, what has he lost?

Oh Awdrey, Awdrey, Awdrey!

What of my daughter Awdrey?


I tell you Awdrey -- do you understand me?
Awdrey, sweet Master! Awdrey, my dear Dame --

Where is she? what is become of her, I pray thee?

Oh the serving-man! the serving-man! the serving-man!

What talk thou of the serving-man? where is Awdrey?

Gone with the serving-man, gone with the serving-man.

Good Puppy, whither is she gone with him?

I cannot tell, he bad me bring you word,
The Captain lay at the Lion, and before
I came again, Awdrey was gone with the serving-man;
I tell you, Awdrey's run away with the serving-man.

'Od'socks! my woman, what shall we do now?

Now, so you help not, man, I know not, I.

This was your pomp of Maids. I told you on it.
Six Maids to vollow you, and not leave one
To wait upo' your Daughter: I zaid, Pride
Would be paid one day, her old vi' pence, wife.

What of John Clay, Ball Puppy?

He has lost --

His life for velonie?

No, his wife by villainy.

Now, villains both! oh that same Huy and Cry!
Oh neighbors! oh that cursed serving-man!
John Clay, where is he?
How! fled for veare, zay ye? will he slip us now?
We that are sureties, must require 'hun out.
How shall we do to find the serving-man?
Cocks bodikins! we must not lose John Clay:
Awdrey, my daughter Awdrey too! let us zend
To all the towns, and zeeke her; but alas,
The Huy and Cry, that must be looked unto.

What, in a passion Turfe?

I good Squire Tub.
Were never honest Varmers thus perplexed.

Turfe, I am privy to thy deep unrest:
The ground of which, springs from an idle plot,
Cast by a Suitor, to your daughter Awdrey --
And thus much, Turfe, let me advertise you;
Your daughter Awdrey, met I on the way,
With Justice Bramble in her company:
Who means to marry her at Pancridge Church.
And there is Chanon Hugh, to meet them ready:
Which to prevent you must not trust delay;
But winged speed must cross their sly intent:
Then hie thee. Turfe, haste to forbid the Banes.

Has Justice Bramble got my daughter Awdrey?
A little while, shall he enjoy her, zure.
But O the Huy and Cry! that hinders me:
I must prusue that, or neglect my journey:
I Will ene leave all: and with the patient Ass,
The over-laden Ass, throw off my burden,
And cast mine office; pluck in my large ears
Betimes, lest some dis-judge 'hem to be horns:
I Will leave to beat it on the broken hoof,
And ease my pasternes. I Will no more High Constables.

I cannot choose, but smile, to see thee troubled
With such a bald, halfe-hatched circumstance!
The Captain was not robbed, as is reported;
That trick the Justice craftily deviz'd,
To break the marriage with the Tile-man Clay.
The Huy, and Cry, was merely counterfeit:
The rather may you judge it to be such,
Because the Bridegroom, was described to be
One of the thieves, first in the velonie.
Which, how far it is from him, yourselves may guess:
'Twas Justice Bramble's vetch, to get the wench.

And is this true Squire Tub?

Believe me Turfe,
As I am a Squire: or less, a Gentleman.

I take my office back: and my authority,
Upon your worships words. Neighbors, I am
High Constable again: where is my zonne Clay?
He shall be zonne, yet, wife, your meat by leisure:
Draw back the spits.

That Is done already man.

I Will break this marriage off: and afterward,
She shall be given to her first betrothed.
Look to the meat, wife: look well to the roast.

I Will follow him aloof, to see the event.

Dame, Mistress, though I do not turn the spit;
I hope yet the Pigs-head.

Come up, Jack-sauce:
It shall be served in to you.

No, no service,
But a reward for service.

I still took you
For an unmannerly Puppy: will you come,
And vetch more wood to the vier, Mr. Ball?

I wood to the vier? I shall piss it out first:
You think to make me ene your ox, or ass;
Or any thing. Though I cannot right my self
On you; I Will sure revenge me on your meat.

Madam, to Kentish Town, we are got at length;
But, by the way we cannot meet the Squire:
Nor by inquiry can we hear of him.
Here is Turfe's house, the father of the Maid.

Pol-Marten, see, the streets are strewn with herbs,
And here has been a wedding, Wispe, it seems!
Pray heaven, this Bridal be not for my son!
Good Marten, knock: knock quickly: Ask for Turfe.
My thoughts misgive me, I am in such a doubt --

Who keeps the house here?

Why the door, and walls
Do keep the house.

I ask then, who is within?

Not you that are without.

Look forth, and speak.
Into the street, here. Come before my Lady.

Before my Lady? Lord have mercy upon me:
If I do come before her, she will see
The hand-som'st man in all the Town, pardee!
Now stand I vore her, what zaith velvet she?

Sirrah, whoseman are you?

Madam, my Masters.

And who is thy Master?

What you tread on, Madam.

I tread on an old Turfe.

That Turfe's my Master.

A merry fellow! what is thy name?

Ball Puppy
They call me at home: abroad, Hanniball Puppy.

Come hither, I must kiss thee, Valentine Puppy.
Wispe! have you got you a Valentine?

None, Madam;
He Is the first stranger that I saw.

To me
He is so, and such. Let Us share him equally.

Help, help good Dame. A reskue, and in time.
In stead of Bills, with Colstaves come; in stead of Spears, with Spits;
Your slices serve for slicing swords, to save me, and my wits:
A Lady, and her woman here, their Huisher eke by side,
(But he stands mute) have plotted how your Puppy to divide.

How now? what noise is this with you, Ball Puppy?

Oh Dame! And fellows of the Kitchen! Arm,
Arm, for my safety; if you love your Ball:
Here is a strange thing, called a Lady, a Mad-dame:
And a device of hers, yclept her woman;
Have plotted on me, in the Kings highway,
To steal me from my self, and cut me in halfes,
To make one Valentine to serve 'hem both;
This for my right-side, that my left hand love.

So saucy, Puppy? to use no more reverence
Unto my Lady, and her velvet Gown?

Turfe's wife, rebuke him not: Your man does please me
With his conceit. Hold: there are ten old nobles,
To make thee merrier yet, half- Valentine.

I thank you right-side: could my left as much,
'Twould make me a man of mark: young Hanniball!

Dido, shall make that good; or I will for her.
Here Dido Wispe, there is for your Hanniball:
He is your Countryman. as well as Valentine.

Here Mr. Hanniball: my Ladies bounty
For her poor woman, Wispe.

Brave Carthage Queen!
And such was Dido: I will ever be
Champion to her, who Juno is to thee.

Your Ladyship is very welcome here.
Please you, good Madam, to go nere the house.

Turfe's wife, I come thus far to seek thy husband,
Having some business to impart unto him.
Is he at home?

O no, and't shall please you:
He is posted hence to Pancridge with a witness.
Young Justice Bramble has kept level coil
Here in our Quarters, stole away our Daughter,
And Mr. Turfe's run after, as he can,
To stop the marriage, if it will be stopped.

Madam, these tidings are not much amiss!
For if the Justice have the Maid in keep,
You need not fear the marriage of your son.

That somewhat eases my suspicious breast.
Tell me, Turfe's wife, when was my son with Awdrey?
How long is it, since you saw him at your house?

Dame, let me take this rump out of your mouth.

What mean you by that Sir?

Rumpe, and taile's all one.
But I would use a reverence for my Lady:
I would not zay surreverence, the tale
Out of your mouth, but rather take the rumpe.

A well bred youth! and vull of favor you are:

What might they zay, when I were gone, if I
Not weighed my wordz? This Puppy is a voole!
Great Hanniball's an Ass; he had no breeding:
No Lady gay, you shall not zay,
That your Val. Puppy, was so unlucky,
In speech to fail, as t'name a tail,
Be as be may be, 'vore a fair Lady.

Leave jesting, tell us, when you saw our son.

Marry, it is two hours ago.

Sin' you saw him?

You might have seen him too, if you had looked up.
For it shind, as bright as day.

Mean my son.

Your sun, and our sun are they not all one?

Fool, thou mistak'st; I asked thee, for my son.

I had thought there had been no more suns, then one.
I know not what you Ladies have, or may have.

Did thou nere hear, my Lady had a son?

She may have twenty; but for a son, unless
She mean precisely, Squire Tub, her zonne,
He was here now; and brought my Mr. word
That Justice Bramble had got Mrs. Awdrey.
But whither he be gone, here is none can tell.

Marten, I wonder at this strange discourse:
The fool it seems tells true; my son the Squire
Was doubtless here this morning. For the match,
I Will smother what I think, and staying here,
Attend the sequel of this strange beginning,
Turfe's wife; my people, and I will trouble thee:
Until we hear some tidings of thy husband.
The rather, for my party Valentine.

Well, I have carried it, and will triumph
Over this Justice, as becomes a Constable;
And a high Constable: next our Saint George,
Who rescued the Kings Daughter, I will ride;
Above Prince Arthur.

Or our Shore ditch Duke.

Or Pancridge Earl.

Or Bevis, or Sir Guy.
Who were high Constables both.

One of Southhampton --.

The the other of Warwick-Castle.

You shall work it
Into a story for me, neighbor Medlay,
Over my Chimney.

I can give you Sir,
A Roman story of a petty-Constable,
That had a Daughter, that was called Virginia,
Like Mrs. Awdrey, and as young as she;
And how her Father bare him in the business,
Against Justice Appius, a Decemvir in Rome,
And Justice of Assise.

That, that good D'ogenes!
A learned man is a Chronikell!

I can tell you
A thousand, of great Pompei, Caesar, Trajan,
All the high Constables there.

That was their place:
They were no more.

Dictator, and high Constable
Were both the same.

High Constable was more, though!
He laid Dick: Tator by the heels.

Dick: Toter!
H'was one of the Waights of the City. I have read o'hun:
He was a fellow would be drunk, debauched --
And he did zet un in the stocks indeed:
His name Vadian, and a cunning Toter.

Was ever silly Maid thus posted off?
That should have had three husbands in one day;
Yet (by bad fortune) am possessed of none?
I went to Church to have been wed to Clay;
Then Squire Tub he seized me on the way,
And thought to have had me: but he mist his aim;
And Justice Bramble (nearest of the three)
Was well nigh married to me; when by chance,
In rushed my Father, and broke off that dance.

I, Girl, there is nere a Justice on 'hem all,
Shall teach the Constable to guard his own:
Let Us back to Kentish-Towne, and there make merry;
These news will be glad tiding to my wife:
Thou shall have Clay, my wench. That word shall stand.
He Is found by this time, sure, or else he is drowned:
The wedding dinner will be spoiled: make haste.

Husbands, they say, grow thick; but thin are sown,
I care not who it be, so I have one.

I? zay you zo? Perhaps you shall have none, for that.

Now out on me! what shall I do then?

Sleep Mistress Awdrey, dream on proper men.

O bone Deus! have you seen the like?
Here was, Hodge hold thine ear, fair, whilst I strike.
Body of me, how came this gear about?

I know not, Chanon, but it falls out cross.
Nor can I make conjecture by the circumstance
Of these events; it was impossible,
Being so close, and politickly carried,
To come so quickly to the ears of Turfe.
O Priest, had but thy slow delivery
Been nimble, and thy lazy Latin tongue,
But run the forms ore, with that swift dispatch,
As had been requisite, all had been well!

What should have been, that never loved the Friar;
But thus you see the old Adage verified,
Multa cadunt inter -- you can guess the rest.
Many things fall between the cup, and lip:
And though they touch, you are not sure to drink.
You lacked good fortune, we had done out parts:
Give a man fortune, throw him in the Sea.
The properer man, the worse luck: Stay a time;
Tempus edax -- In time the stately Ox, etc.
Good counsels lightly never come too late.

You Sir will run your counsels out of breath.

Spur a free horse, he will run himself to death.
Sancti Evangelistae! Here comes Miles!

What news man, with our new made Purs'yvant?

A Pursuyvant? would I were, or more pursie,
And had more store of money; or less pursie,
And had more store of breath: you call me Pursyvant!
But, I could never vant of any purse
I had, sin' yo' were my Godfathers, and Godmothers,
And ga'me that nickname.

What, now is the matter?

Nay, it is no matter. I have been simply beaten.

What is become of the Squire, and thy Prisoner?

The lines of blood, ran streaming from my head,
Can speak what rule the Squire has kept with me.

I pray thee Miles relate the manner, how?

Be It known unto you, by these presents, then,
That I Miles Metaphore, your worships Clarke:
Have ene been beaten, to an Allegory,
By multitude of hands. Had they been but
Some five or six, IN had whipped 'hem all, like tops
In Lent, and hurled 'hem into Hoblers-hole;
Or the next ditch: I had cracked all their costards,
As nimbly as a Squirrell will crack nuts:
And flourished like to Hercules, the Porter
Among the Pages. But, when they came on
Like Bees about a Hive, Crows about carrion,
Flies about sweet meats; nay, like watermen
About a Fare: then was poor Metaphore
Glad to give up the honor of the day,
To quit his charge to them, and run away
To save his life, only to tell this news.

How indirectly all things have fallen out!
I cannot choose bat wonder what they were
Reskued your rival from the keep of Miles:
But most of all I cannot well digest,
The manner how our purpose came to Turfe.

Miles, I will see that all thy hurts be dressed.
As for the Squires escape, it matters not:
We have by this means disappointed him;
And that was all the maine I aimed at.
But Chanon Hugh, now muster up thy wits,
And call thy thoughts into the Consistory.
Search all the secret corners of thy cap,
To find another queint devised drift,
To disappoint her marriage with this Clay;
Do that, and He reward thee jovially.

Well said Magister Justice. If I fit you not
With such a new, and well-laid stratagem,
As never yet your ears did hear a finer,
Call me, with Lilly, Bos, Fur, Sus, atque Sacerdos.

I hear, there is comfort in thy words yet, Chanon.
I Will trust thy regulars, and say no more.

I Will follow too. And if the dapper Priest
Be but as cunning, point in his de vise,
As I was in my lie: my Master Preamble
Will stalk, as led by the nose with these new promises,
And fatted with supposes of fine hopes.

Well Madam, I may thank the Squire your son:
For, but for him, I had been over-reached.

Now heavens blessing light upon his heart:
We are beholden to him, indeed Madam.

But can you not resolve me where he is?
Nor about what his purposes were bent?

Madam, they no whit were concerning me:
And therefore was I less inquisitive.

Fair maid, in faith, speak truth, and not dissemble:
Does he not often come, and visit you?

His worship now, and then, please you, takes pains
To see my Father, and Mother: But for me,
I know my self too mean for his high thoughts
To stoop at, more then asking a light question,
To make him merry, or to pass his time.

A sober Maid! call for my woman Marten.

The maids, and her half- Valentine have pli'd her
With court'sie of the Bride-Cake, and the Bowl,
As she is laid a while.

O let her rest!
We will cross ore to Canterbury, in the interim;
And so make home. Farewell good Turfe, and thy wife.
I wish your daughter joy.

Thanks to your Ladyship,
Where is John Clay now? have you seen him yet?

No, he has hid himself out of the way,
For fear of the Huy and Cry.

What, walks that shadow
Avore'un still? Puppy go seek 'un out,
Search all the corners that he haunts unto,
And call 'un forth. We Will once more to the Church,
And try our vortunes. Luck, son Valentine:
Where are the wisemen all of Finzbury?

Where wisemen should be; at the Ale, and Bride cake.
I would this couple had their destiny,
Or to be hanged, or married out of the way:
Man cannot get the mount'nance of an Egge-shell,
To stay his stomach. Vaith, vor mine own part,
I have zup'd up so much broth, as would have covered
A leg of Beef, ore head and ears, in the porredge pot:
And yet I cannot sussifie wild nature.
Would they were once dispatched, we might to dinner.
I am with child of a huge stomach, and long;
Till by some honest Midwife-peice of Beef,
I be delivered of it: I must go now,
And hunt out for this Kilburne Calfe, John Clay:
Whom where to find, I know not, nor which way.

Thus as a beggar in a Kings disguise,
Or an old Cross well sided with a May Pole.
Comes Chanon Hugh, accoutred as you see
Disguised Soldado like: mark his devise:
The Chanon, is that Captain Thum's, was robbed:
These bloody scars upon my face are wounds;
This scarf upon mine arm shows my late hurts:
And thus am I to gull the Constable.
Now have among you, for a man at arms:
Friends by your leave, which of you is one Turfe?

Sir, I am Turfe, if you would speak with me.

With thee Turfe, if thou be High Constable.

I am both Turfe, Sir, and High Constable.

Then Turfe, or Scurfe, high, or low Constable,
Know, I was once a Captain at Saint Quintins,
And passing cross the ways over the countrey'
This morning betwixt this and Hamsted-Heath,
Was by a crew of Clownes robbed, bob'd, and hurt.
No sooner had I got my wounds bound up,
But with much pain, I went to the next Justice,
One Mr. Bramble here, at Maribone:
And here a warrant is, which he has directed
For you one Turfe; if your name be Tobie Turfe;
Who have let fall (they say) the Huy, and Cry:
And you shall answer it before the Justice.

Heaven, and Hell, Dogs, Devils, what is this?
Neighbors, was ever Constable thus crossed?
What shall we do?

Faith, all go hang our selves:
I know no other way to escape the Law.

News, news, O news --

What, have thou found out Clay?

No Sir, the news is that I cannot find him.

Why do you dally, you damned russet coat,
You Peasant, nay you Clown, you Constable;
See that you bring forth the suspected party,
Or by mine honor (which I won in field)
I Will make you pay for it, before the Justice.

Fie, fie; O wife, IN am now in a fine pickle.
He that was most suspected is not found;
And which now makes me think, he did the deed,
He thus absents him, and dares not be seen.
Captain, my innocence will plead for me.
Wife, I must go, needs, whom the Devil drives:
Pray for me wife, and daughter; pray for me.

I Will lead the way: Thus is the match put off,
And it my plot succeed, as I have laid it,
My Captaine-ship shall cost him many a crown.


Out on that villain Clay: would he do a robbery?
I Will nere trust smooth-faced Tile-man for his sake.



Thus is my Master, Toby Turfe, the pattern
Of all the painful a'ventures, now in print.
I never could hope better of this match:
This Bride-ale: For the night before to day,
(Which is within man's memory, I take it)
At the report of it, an Ox did speak;
Who died soon after: A Cow lost her Calfe:
The Belwether was flead for it: A fat Hog
Was singed, and washed, and shaven all over; to
Look ugly against this day: The Ducks they quaked;
The Hens too cackled: at the noise whereof,
A Drake was seen to dance a headless round:
The Goose was cut in the head, to hear it too:
Brave Chant-it-cleare, his noble heart was done;
His comb was cut: And two or three of his wives,
Or fairest Concubines, had their necks broke,
Ere they would zee this day: To mark the verven
Heart of a beast, the very Pig, the Pig,
This very mornin, as he was a rosting
Cried out his eyes, and made a show as he would
Have bit in two the spit, as he would say;
There shall no rost-meat be this dismal day.
And zure, I think, If I had not got his tongue
Between my teeth, and eat it, he had spoke it.
Well, I will in, and cry too; never leave
Crying, until our maids may drive a Buck
With my salt tears at the next washing day.

Keep out those fellows; I Will have none come in,
But the High Constable, the man of peace,
And the Queens Captain, the brave man of war.
Now neighbor Turfe, the cause why you are called,
Before me by my warrant, but unspecified,
Is this; and pray you mark it thoroughly!
Here is a Gentleman, and as it seems,
Both of good birth, fair speech, and peaceable,
Who was this morning robbed here in the wood:
You for your part a man of good report,
Of credit, landed, and of fair demeanes,
And by authority, high Constable;
Are notwithstanding touched in this complaint,
Of being careless in the Huy and Cry.
I cannot choose but grieve a Soldiers loss:
And I am sorry too for your neglect,
Being my neighbor; this is all I object.

This is not all; I can allege far more,
And almost urge him for an accessorie.
Good Mr Justice gi'me leave to speak,
For I am Plaintiff. Let not neighborhood
Make him secure, or stand on privilege.

Sir, I dare use no partiality:
Object then what you please, so it be truth.

This more: and which is more, then he can answer,
Beside his letting fall the Huy, and Cry
He does protect the man, charged with the felony,
And keeps him hid I hear, within his house,
Because he is affied unto his Daughter.

I do defy 'hun, so shall she do too.
I pray your worships favor, le' me have hearing.
I do convesse, 'twas told me such a velonie,
And't not disgriev'd me a little when 'twas told me,
Vor I was going to Church, to marry Awdrey:
And who should marry her, but this very Clay,
Who was charged to be the chief theife of hun all.
Now I (the halter stick me, if I tell,
Your worships any leazins did fore-thinke 'un
The truest man, till he waz run away.
I thought, I had had 'un as zure as in a zaw-pit,
Or in mine Oven. Nay, in the Towne-pound.
I was za sure of hun: I Would have gi'n my life for 'un,
Till he did start. But now, I zee 'un guilty,
Az var as I can look at 'un. Would you have more?

Yes, I will have Sir what the Law will give me.
You gave your word to see him safe, forth coming;
I challenge that: But, that is forfeited;
Beside, your carelessness in the pursuit,
Argues your slacknesse, and neglect of duty,
Which ought be punished with severity.

He speaks but reason

Bring forth the man,
And you are quit: But otherwise, your word
Binds you to make amends for all his loss,
And think your self befriended, if he take it
Without a farther suit, or going to law.
Come to a composition with him, Turfe:
The Law is costly, and will draw on charge.

Yes, I do know, I vurst mun vee a Returney,
And then make legs to my great man of Law,
To be of my counsel, and take trouble-vees,
And yet zay nothing vor me, but devise
All district means, to ransackle me of my money.
A Pest'lence prick the throats of hun. I do know hun
As well az I waz in their bellies, and brought up there.
What would you have me do? what would you ask of me?

I ask the restitution of my money;
And will not bate one penny of the sum:
Four score, and five pound. I ask, besides,
Amendment for my hurts; my pain, and suffering
Are loss enough for me, Sir, to sit down with,
I Will put it to your worship; what you award me,
I Will take; and gi' him a general release.

And what say you now, neighbor Turfe?

I put it
Ene to your worships bitterment, hab, nab.
I shall have a chance of the dice for it, I hope, let 'hem ene run: And

Faith then I Will pray you, 'cause he is my neighbor,
To take a hundred pound, and give him day.

Saint Valentines day, I will, this very day,
Before Sun set: my bond is forfeit else.

Where will you have it paid?

Faith, I am a stranger
Here in the country: Know you Chanon Hugh,
The Vicar of Pancrace?

Yes, we who not him?

I Will make him my Attorney to receive it,
And give you a discharge.

Whom shall I send for it?

Why, if you please, send Metaphore my Clarke.
And Turfe, I much commend thy willingness;
It Is argument of thy integrity.

But, my integrity shall be my zelfe still:
Good Mr. Metaphore, give my wife this key;
And do but whisper it into her hand:
(She knows it well inow) bid her, by that
Deliver you the two zeal'd bags of silver,
That lie in the corner of the cup-bord, stands
At my bedside, they' are viftie pound a piece;
And bring 'hem to your Master.

If I prove not
As just a Carrier as my friend Tom Long was,
Then call me his curtall, change my name of Miles,
To Guile's, Wile's, Pile's, Bile's, or the foulest name
You can devise, to crambe with, for ale.

Come hither Miles, bring by that token, too,
Fair Awdrey; say her father sent for her:
Say Clay is found, and waits at Pancrace Church,
Where I attend to marry them in haste.
For (by this means) Miles I may say it to thee,
Thy Master must to Awdrey married be.
But not a word but mum: go get thee gone;
Be wary of thy charge, and keep it close.

O super-dainty Chanon! Vicar in coney,
Make no delay, Miles, but a way.
And bring the wench, and money.

Now Sir, I see you meant but honestly;
And, but that business calls me hence away,
I would not leave you, till the sun were lower.
But Mr. Justice, one word, Sir, with you.
By the same token, is your Mistress sent for
By Metaphore your Clarke, as from her Father.
Who when she comes, I Will marry her to you,
Unwitting to this Turfe, who shall attend
Me at the parsonage. This was my plot:
Which I must now make good; turn Chanon, again,
In my square cap. I humbly take my leave.

Adieu, good Captain. Trust me, neighbor Turfe,
He seems to be a sober Gentleman:
But this distress has somewhat stirred his patience.
And men, you know, in such extremities,
Apt not themselves to points of courtesy;
I Am glad you have made this end.

You stood my friend:
I thank your Justice-worship; pray you be
Prezent anon, at tendering of the money,
And zee me have a discharge: Vor I have no craft
IN your Law quiblins.

I Will secure you, neighbor.

Indeed, there is a woundy luck in names, Sirs,
And a maine mystery, an' a man knew where.
To vind it. My God-sires name, I Will tell you,
Was In-and-In Shittle, and a Weaver he was,
And it did fit his craft: for so his Shittle
Went in, and in, still: this way, and then that way.
And he named me, In-and In Medlay: which serves
A Joyners craft, because that we do lay
Things in and in, in our work. But, I am truly
Architectonicus professor, rather:
That is (as one would zay) an Architect.

As I am a Varrier, and a Visicarie:
Horse-smith of Hamsted, and the whole Town Leach --.

Yes, you have done woundy cures, Gossip Clench.

An' I can zee the stale once, through a Vrine-hole,
I Will give a shrewd guess, be it man, or beast.
I cured an Ale-wife once, that had the staggers
Worse then five horses, without rowelling.
My God-phere was a Rabian, or a Jew,
(You can tell D'oge!) They called un Doctor Rasi.

One Rasis was a great Arabic Doctor.

He was King Harry's Doctor, and my God-phere.

Mine was a merry Greek, To-Pan, of Twyford:
A joviall Tinker, and a stopper of holes;
Who left me mettall-man of Belsise, his heir.

But what was yours D'oge?

Vaith, I cannot tell
If mine were kyrsind, or no. But, zure he had
A kyrsin name, that he left me, Diogenes.
A mighty learned man, but pest'lence poor.
Vor, he had no house, save an old Tub, to dwell in,
(I vind that in records) and still he turned it
IN the winds teeth, as't blew on his backside,
And there they would lie rowting one at other,
A week, sometimes.

Thence came A Tale of a Tub;
And the virst Tale of a Tub, old D'ogenes Tub.

That was avore Sir Peter Tub, or his Lady.

I, or the Squire their son, Tripoli Tub.

The Squire is a fine Gentleman!

He is more:
A Gentleman and a half; almost a Knight;
Within zixe inches: That Is his true measure.

Zure, you can gage 'hun.

To a streake, or less:
I know his d'ameters, and circumference:
A Knight is six diameters; and a Squire
Is vive, and zomewhat more: I know it by compass,
And skale of man. I have upo' my rule here,
The just perportions of a Knight, a Squire;
With a tame Justice, or an Officer, rampant,
Vpo' the bench, from the high Constable
Down to the Head-borough, or Tithing-man;
Or meanest Minister of the peace, God save 'un.

Why, you can tell us by the Squire, Neighbor,
Whence he is called a Constable, and whaffore.

No, that is a booke-case: Scriben can do that.
That Is writing and reading, and records.

Two words,
Cyning and Staple, make a Constable:
As we would say, A hold, or stay for the King.

All Constables are truly John's for the King,
What ere their names are; be they Tony, or Roger.

And all are sworn, as vingars of one hand,
To hold together against the breach of the peace;
The High Constable is the Thumb, as one would zay,
The hold-fast of the rest.

Pray luck he speed
Well in the business, between Captain Thums,
And him.

'Ile warrant 'un for a groat:
I have his measures here in Rithmetique.
How he should bear un self in all the lines
Of's place, and office: Let Us zeeke 'un out.

Hilts, how do thou like of this our good days work?

As good ene nere a whit, as nere the better.

Shall we to Pancridge, or to Kentish-Towne, Hilts?

Let Kentish-Towne, or Pancridge come to us,
If either will: I will go home again.

Faith Basket, our success has been but bad,
And nothing prospers, that we undertake;
For we can neither meet with Clay, nor Awdrey,
The Chanon Hugh, nor Turfe the Constable:
We are like men that wander in strange woods,
And loose our selves in search of them we seek.

This was because we rose on the wrong side:
But as I am now here, just in the midway,
I Will zet my sword on the pommell, and that line
The point valles too, we will take. whether it be
To Kentish-Towne, the Church, or home again.

Brambles Clarke,
The unlucky Hare has crossed us all this day.
I Will stand aside whilst thou pump'st out of him
His business, Hilts; and how he is now employed.

Let me alone? I Will use him in his kind.

Oh for a Pad-horse, Pack-horse, or a Post-horse,
To bear me on his neck, his back, or his croupe!
I am as weary with running, as a Mil-horse
That has led the Mill once, twice, thrice about,
After the breath has been out of his body.
I could get up upon a pannier, a pannell,
Or, to say truth, a very Pack-sadle,
Till all my honey were turned into gall;
And I could ^it in the seat no longer,
Oh the legs of a lackey now, or a footman,
Who is the Surbater of a Clarke current,
And the confounder of his treslesse dormant.
But who have we here, just in the nick?

I am neither nick, nor in the nick: therefore
You lie Sir Metaphor.

Lie? how?

Lie so Sir.



Thou lie of the ground.
Do thou know me?

Yes, I did know you too late.

What is my name then?

Basket.

Basket? what?

Basket, the Great --

The Great? what?

Lubber --
I should say Lover, of the Squire his Master.

Great is my patience, to forbear thee thus,
Thou Scrape-hill, Skoundrell, and thou skum of man;
Uncivil, orenge-tawny-coated Clarke:
Thou came but half a thing into the world,
And wast made up of patches, parings, shreds:
Thou, that when last thou were put out of service,
Travaild'st to Hamsted Heath, on an Ash-we'nsday,
Where thou did stand six weeks the Jack of Lent,
For boys to hoorle, three throws a penny, at thee,
To make thee a purse: See thou this, bold bright blade?
As minced meat for a pie. I Will set thee in earth
All save thy head, and thy right arm at liberty,
To keep thy hat off, while I question thee,
What? why? and whether thou were going now
With a face, ready to break out with business?
And tell me truly, lest I dash't in pieces.

Then Basket put thy smiter up, and hear;
I dare not tell the truth to a drawn sword.

It Is sheathed, stand up, speak without fear, or wit.

I know not what they mean; but Constable Turfe
Sends here his key; for moneys in his cubbard
Which he must pay the Captain, that was robbed
This morning. Smell you nothing?

No, not I;
Thy breeches yet are honest.

As my mouth.
Do you not smell a rat? I tell you truth,
I think all is knavery: For the Chanon whispered
Me in the ear, when Turfe had gi'n me his key,
By the same token to bring Mrs. Awdrey,
As sent for thither; and to say John Clay
Is found, which is indeed to get the wench
Forth for my Master, who is to be married,
When she comes there: The Chanon has his rules
Ready, and all there to dispatch the matter.

Now on my life, this is the Chanon's plot!
Miles, I have heard all thy discourse to Basket.
Will thou be true, and I Will reward thee well,
To make me happy, in my Mistress Awdrey?

Your worship shall dispose of Metaphore,
Through all his parts, ene from the sole of the head,
To the crown of the foot, to manage of your service.

Then do thy message to the Mistress Turfe,
Tell her thy token, bring the money hither,
And likewise take young Awdrey to thy charge:
Which done, here, Metaphore, we will attend,
And intercept thee. And for thy reward,
You two shall share the money; I the Maid:
If any take offense, I Will make all good.

But shall I have half the money Sir, in faith?

I on my Squire-ship, shall thou: and my land.

Then, if I make not, Sir, the cleanliest scuse
To get her hither, and be then as careful
To keep her for you, as't were for my self:
Down of your knees, and pray that honest Miles
May break his neck ere he get ore two styles.

Make haste then: we will wait here thy return.
This luck unlooked for, has revived my hopes,
Which were oppressed with a dark melancholy.
In happy time, we lingered on the way,
To meet these summons of a better sound,
Which are the essence of my souls content.

This heartlesse fellow; shame to serving-men;
Stain of all livories; what fear makes him do!
How sordid, wretched, and unworthy things;
Betray his Masters secrets, open the closet
Of his devises, force the foolish Justice,
Make way for your Love, plotting of his own:
Like him that digs a trap, to catch another,
And falls into it himself!

So would I have it.
And hope 'twill prove a jest to twit the Justice with.

But that this poor white-liver'd Rogue should do it?
And merely out of fear?

And hope of money, Hilts.
A valiant man will nible at that bait.

Who, but a fool, will refuse money proffered?

And sent by so good chance. Pray heaven he speed.

If he come empty-headed, let him count
To go back empty-headed; I Will not leave him
So much of brain in's pate, with pepper and vinegar,
To be served in for sauce, to a Calves head.

Thou serv'st him rightly, Hilts.

I Will seal az much
With my hand, as I dare say now with my tongue;
But if you get the Less from Dargison,
What will you do with her?

We Will think of that
When once we have her in possession, Governor.

You see we trust you, Mr. Metaphore,
With Mrs. Awdrey: pray you use her well,
As a Gentlewoman should be used. For my part,
I do incline a little to the serving-man;
We have been of a coat -- I had one like yours:
Till it did play me such a sleevelesse errand,
As I had nothing where to put mine arms in,
And then I threw it off. Pray you go before her,
Serving-man-like: and see that your nose drop not.
As for example; you shall see me: mark,
How I go before her. So do you: sweet Miles,
She for her own part, is a woman cares not
What man can do unto her, in the way
Of honesty, and good manners. So farewell
Fair Mrs. Awdrey: Farewell Mr. Miles.
I have brought you thus far, onward o'your way:
I must go back now to make clean the rooms,
Where my good Lady has been. Pray you commend me
To Bridegroom Clay; and bid him bear up stiff.

Thank you good Hanniball Puppy; I shall fit
The leg of your commands, with the straight buskins
Of dispatch presently.

Farewell fine Metaphore.

Come gentle Mistress, will you please to walk?

I love not to be led: I Would go alone.

Let not the mouse of my good meaning, Lady,
Be snap'd up in the trap of your suspicion,
To loose the tail there, either of her truth,
Or swallowed by the Cat of misconstruction.

You are too finicall form; speak plain Sir.

Welcome again my Awdrey: welcome Love:
You shall with me; in faith deny me not.
I cannot brook the second hazard Mistress.

Forbear Squire Tub, as mine own mother says;
I am not for your mowing. You Will be flowne
Ere I be fledge.

Have thou the money Miles?

Here are two bags, there is fifty pound in each.

Nay Awdrey, I possess you for this time:
Sirs; Take that coin between you, and divide it.
My pretty sweeting give me now the leave
To challenge love, and marriage at your hands.

Now, out upon you, are you not ashamed?
What will my Lady say? In faith I think
She was at our house: And I think she asked for you:
And I think she hit me in the teeth with you,
I thank her Ladyship, and I think she means
Not to go hence, till she has found you. How say you?

Was then my Lady Mother at your house?
Let Us have a word aside.

Yes, twenty words.

It Is strange, a motion, but I know not what,
Comes in my mind, to leave the way to Totten,
And turn to Kentish-Towne, again my journey:
And see my son Pol-marten with his Awdrey:
Ere while we left her at her fathers house:
And has he thence removed her in such haste!
What shall I do? shall I speak faite, or chide?

Madam, your worthy son, with dutious care,
Can govern his affections: Rather then
Break off their conference some other way,
Pretending ignorance of what you know.

And this all, fair

I am thine.

Mine you were once, though scarcely now your own.

'Slid my Lady! my Lady!

Is this my Lady bright?

Madam, you took me now a little tardie.

At prayers, I think you were: what, so devout
Of late, that you will shrive you to all Confessors
You meet by chance? Come, go with me, good Squire,
And leave your linen: I have now a business,
And of importance, to impart unto you.

Madam, I pray you, spare me but an hour;
Please you to walk before, I follow you.

It must be now, my business lies this way.

Will not an hour hence, Madam, excuse me?

Squire, these excuses argue more your guilt.
You have some new device now, to project,
Which the poor Tile-man scarce will thank you for.
What? will you go?

I have taken a charge upon me,
To see this Maid conducted to her Father,
Who, with the Chanon Hugh, stays her at Pancrace,
To see her married to the same John Clay.

It Is very well; but Squire take you no care.
I Will send Pol-marten with her, for that office.
You shall along with me; it is decreed.

I have a little business, with a friend Madam.

That friend shall stay for you, or you for him.
Pol-marten; Take the Maiden to your care;
Commend me to her Father.

I will follow you.

Tut, tell not me of following.

I Will but speak
A word.

No whispering: you forget your self,
And make your love too palpable: A Squire?
And think so meanly? fall upon a Cow-shard?
You know my mind. Come, I Will to Turfe's house,
And see for Dido, and our Valentine.
Pol-marten, look to your charge; I Will look to mine.

I smile to think after so many proffers
This Maid has had, she now should fall to me:
That I should have her in my custody:
Twere but a mad trick to make the essay,
And jumpe a match with her immediately:
She Is fair, and handsome: and she is rich enough:
Both time, and place minister fair occasion:
Have at it then: Fair Lady, can you love?

No Sir, what is that?

A toy, which women use.

If It be a toy, it is good to play withal.

We will not stand discoursing of the toy:
The way is short please you to prov't Mistress?

If you do mean to stand so long upon it;
I pray you let me give it a short cut, Sir.

It Is thus, fair Maid: Are you disposed to marry?

You are disposed to ask.

Are you to grant?

Nay, now I see you are disposed indeed.

I see the wench wants but a little wit;
And that defect her wealth may well supply:
In plain terms, tell me, Will you have me Awdrey?

In as plain terms, I tell you who would have me.
John Clay would have me, but he has too hard hands;
I like not him: besides, he is a thief.
And Justice Bramble, he would feign have caught me:
But the young Squire, he, rather then his life,
Would have me yet; and make me a Lady, he says,
And be my Knight; to do me true Knights service,
Before his Lady Mother. Can you make me
A Lady, would I have you?

I can gi' you
A silken Gown, and a rich Petticoat:
And a french Hood. All fools love to be brave:
I find her humor, and I will pursue it.

And as I told thee, she was intercepted
By the Squire here, my son: and this bold Ruffin
His man, who safely would have carried her
Unto her Father; and the Chanon Hugh;
But for more care of the security,
My Huisher has her now, in his grave charge.

Now on my faith, and holy-dom, we are
Beholden to your worship. She Is a Girl,
A foolish Girl, and soon may tempted be:
But if this day pass well once ore her head,
I Will wish her trust to her self. For I have been
A very mother to her, though I say it.

Madam, it is late, and Pancridge is in your way:
I think your Ladyship forgets your self.

Your mind runs much on Pancridge. Well, young Squire,
The black Ox never trod yet O your foot:
These idle Phant'sies will forsake you one day.
Come Mrs. Turfe, will you go take a walk
Over the fields to Pancridge, to your husband?

Madam, I had been there an hour ago:
But that I waited on my man Ball Puppy.
What Ball I say? I think the idle ^^ouch
Be fallen asleep in the barn, he stays so long.

Satin, in the name of velvet Satin, Dame!
The Devil! O the Devil is in the barn:
Help, help, a legion -- Spirit legion,
Is in the barn! in every straw a Devil.

Why do thou bawle so Puppy? Speak, what ailes thee?

My name's Ball Puppy, I have seen the Devil
Among the straw: O for a Cross! a Collop
Of Friar Bacon, or a conjuring stick
Of Doctor Faustus! Spirits are in the barn.

How! Spirits in the barn? Basket, go see.

Sir, an' you were my Master ten times over,
And Squire to boot; I know, and you shall pardon me:
Send me among Devils? I zee you love me not:
Hell be at their game: I Will not trouble them.

Go see; I warrant thee there is no such matter.

An' they were Giants, 't were another matter.
But Devils! No, if I be torn in pieces,
What is your warrant worth? I Will see the Feind
Set fire of the barn, ere I come there.

Now all Zaints bless us, and if he be there,
He is an ugly spright, I warrant.

As ever
Held flesh-hooke, Dame, or handled fire-forke rather:
They have put me in a sweet pickle, Dame:
But that my Lady- Valentine smells of musk,
I should be ashamed to press into this presence.

Basket, I pray thee see what is the miracle!

Come, go with me: I Will lead. Why stand'st thou man?

Cocks precious Master, you are not mad indeed?
You will not go to hell before your time?

Why art thou thus afraid?

No, not afraid:
But by your leave, I Will come no near the barn.

Puppy! will thou go with me?

How? go with you*
Whither, into the Barn? To whom, the Devil?
Or to do what there? to be torn amongst 'hum?
Stay for my Master, the High Constable,
Or In-and-In, the Head-borough; let them go,
Into the Barn with warrant, seize the Feind;
And set him in the stocks for his ill rule:
It Is not for me that am but flesh and blood,
To meddle with 'un. Vor I cannot, nor I wu' not.

I pray thee Tripoly, look, what is the matter?

That shall I Madam.

Heaven protect my Master.
I tremble every joint till he be back.

Now, now, even now they are tearing him in pieces*
Now are they tossing of his legs, and arms,
Like Loggets at a Peare-tree: I Will to the hole,
Peep in, and look whether he lives or dies.

I would not be in my Masters coat for thousands.

Then pluck it off, and turn thy self away.
O the Devil! the Devil! the Devil!

Where man? where?

Alas that ever we were borne. So near too?

The Squire has him in his hand, and leads him
Out by the Collar.

O this is John Clay.

John Clay at Pancrace, is there to be married.

This was the spirit reveld in the Barn.

The Devil he was: was this he was crawling
Among the Wheat-straw? Had it been the Barley,
I should have taken him for the Devil in drink;
The Spirit of the Bride-ale: But poor John,
Tame John of Clay, that sticks about the bung-hole --

If this be all your Devil, I would take
In hand to conjure him: But hell take me
If ere I come in a right Devils walk,
If I can keep me out on it.

Well meant Hilts.

But how came Clay thus hid here in the straw,
When news was brought, to you all he was at Pancridge;
And you believed it?

Justice Brambles man
Told me so, Madam: And by that same token,
And other things, he had away my Daughter,
And two sealed bags of money.

Where Is the Squire?
Is he gone hence?

H' was here Madam, but now.

Is the Huy and Cry past by?

I, I, John Clay.

And am I out of danger to be hanged?

Hanged John? yes sure; unless, as with the Proverb,
You mean to make the choice of your own gallows.

Nay, then all is well, hearing your news Ball Pupy,
You have brought from Paddington, I ene stole home here,
And thought to hide me, in the Barn ere since.

O wonderful! and news was brought us here,
You were at Pancridge, ready to be married.

No faith, I nere was further then the Barn.

Haste Puppy. Call forth Mistress Dido Wispe,
My Ladies Gentlewoman, to her Lady;
And call your self forth, and a couple of maids,
To wait upon me: we are all undone!
My Lady is undone! her fine young son,
The Squire is got away.

Haste, haste, good Valentine.

And you John Clay; you are undone too! All!
My husband is undone, by a true key,
But a false token: And my selfe's undone,
By parting with my Daughter, who will be married
To some body, that she should not, if we haste not.

I Pray thee good Pol-marten, show thy diligence,
And faith in both: Get her, but so disguised,
The Chanon may not know her, and leave me
To plot the rest: I will expect thee here.

You shall Squire. I Will perform it with all care,
If all my Ladies Wardrobe will disguise her.
Come Mistress Awdrey.

Is the Squire gone?

He Will meet us by and by, where he appointed:
You shall be brave anon, as none shall know you.

I wonder, where the Queens High Constable is!
I veare, they have made 'hun away.

No zure; The Justice
Dare not conzent to that. He Will zee 'un forth coming.

He must, vor we can all take corpulent oath,
We zaw 'un go in there.

I, upon record!
The Clock dropped twelve at Maribone.

You are right, D'oge!
Zet down to a minute, now it is a 'most vowre.

Here comes Squire Tub.

And's Governor, Mr. Basket.
Hilts, do you know 'hun, a valiant wise vellow!
Az tall a man on his hands, as goes on veet.
Bless you Mass' Basket.

Thank you good D'oge.

who is that?

D'oge Scriben, the great Writer Sir of Chalcot.

And, who the rest?

The wisest heads of the hundred.
Medlay the Ioyner, Head-borough of Islington,
Pan of Belsize, and Clench the Leach of Hamsted.
The High Constables Counsel, here of Finsbury,

Prezent me to 'hem, Hilts, Squire Tub of Totten.

Wise men of Finsbury: make place for a Squire,
I bring to your acquaintance, Tub of Totten.
Squire Tub, my Master, loves all men of virtue.
And longs (az one would zay) till he be one on you.

His worship's wel'cun to our company:
Would't were wiser for 'hun.

Here be some on us,
Are called the witty men, over a hundred;

And zome a thousand, when the Muster day comes.

I long (as my man Hilts said, and my Governor)
To be adopt in your society.
Can any man make a Masque here in this company?

A Masque, what is that?

A mumming, or a show.
With vizards, and fine clothes.

A disguise, neighbor,
Is the true word: There stands the man, can do it Sir.
Medlay the Joyner, In-and-In of Islington,
The only man at a disguize in Midlesex.

But who shall write it?

Scriben, the great Writer.

He Will do it alone Sir, He will join with no man:
Though he be a Joyner, in design he calls it.
He must be sole Inventer: In-and-In.
Draws with no other in's project, he will tell you,
It cannot else be feazeable, or conduce:
Those are his ruling words? Pleaze you to hear 'hun?

Yes Mr. In-and-In, I have heard of you;

I can do nothing, I.

He can do all Sir.

They Will tell you so.

I Would have a toy presented,
A Tale of a Tub, a story of my self,
You can express a Tub.

If it conduce
To the design, what ere is feazeable:
I can express a Wash-house (If need be)
With a whole pedigree of Tubs.

No, one
Will be enough to note our name, and family:
Squire Tub of Totten, and to show my adventures
This very day. I Would have it in Tubs-Hall,
At Totten-Court, my Lady Mothers house,
My house indeed, for I am heir to it.

If I might see the place, and had surveyed it;
I could say more: For all Invention, Sir,
Comes by degrees, and on the view of nature;
A world of things, concur to the design,
Which make it feazible, if Art conduce.

You say well, witty Mr. In-and-In.
How long have you studied Ingine?

Since I first
Joined, or did in-lay in wit, some vorty year.

A pretty time! Basket, go you and wait
On Master In-and-In to Totten-Court,
And all the other wise Masters; show 'hem the Hall:
And taste the language of the buttery to 'hem;
Let 'hem see all the Tubs about the house,
That can raise matter, till I come -- which shall be a
Within an hour at least.

It will be glorious,
If In-and-In will undertake it, Sir:
He has a monstrous medlay wit of his own.

Spare for no cost, either in boords, or hoops,
To architect your Tub: Have you nere a Cooper
At London called Vitruvius? send ^^r him;
Or old John Haywood, call him to you, to help.

He scorns the motion, trust to him alone.

O, here is the Squire! you slipped us finely son!
These manners to your Mother, will commend you;
But in an other age, not this: well Tripoly,
Your Father, good Sir Peter (rest his bones)
Would not ha done this: where is my Huisher Martin?
And your fair Mrs. Awdrey?

I not see'hem,
No creature, but the four wise Masters here,
Of Finsbury Hundred, came to cry their Constable,
Who they do say is lost.

My husband lost?
And my fond Daughter lost? I fear me too.
Where is your Gentleman, Madam? Poor John Clay,
Thou have lost thy Awdrey.

I have lost my wits,
My little wits, good Mother; I am distracted.

And I have lost my Mistress Dido Wispe,
Who frowns upon her Puppy, Hanniball.
Loss! loss on everyside! a public loss!
Loss of my Master! loss of his Daughter! loss
Of Favor, Friends, my Mistress! loss of all!

What Cry is this?

My man speaks of some loss.

My Master is found: Good luck, and't be thy will,
Light on us all.

O husband, are you a live?
They said you were lost.

Where Is Justice Brambles Clarke?
Had he the money that I sent for?

Yes,
Two hours ago, two fifty pounds in silver,
And Awdrey too.

Why Awdrey? who sent for her?

You Master Turfe, the fellow said.

He lied.
I am cozened, robbed, undone: your man's a Thief,
And run away with my Daughter, Mr. Bramble,
And with my money.

Neighbor Turfe have patience,
I can assure you that your Daughter is safe,
But for the moneys I know nothing of.

My money is my Daughter; and my Daughter
She is my money, Madam.

I do wonder
Your Ladyship comes to know any thing
In these affairs.

Yes, Justice Bramble
I met the maiden in the fields by chance,
IN the Squires company my son: How he
Lighted upon her, himself best can tell.

I intercepted her, as coming hither,
To her Father, who sent for her, by Miles Metaphore,
Justice Preambles Clarke. And had your Ladyship
Not hindered it, I had paid fine Mr. Justice
For his young warrant, and new Purs'yvant,
He served it by this morning.

Know you that Sir?

You told me, Squire, a quite other tale,
But I believed you not, which made me send
Awdrey another way, by my Pol-marten:
And take my journey back to Kentish-Towne,
Where we found John Clay hidden in the barn,
To escape the Huy and Cry; and here he is.

John Clay age'n! nay, then -- set Cock a hoope:
I have lost no Daughter, nor no money, Justice.
John Clay shall pay. I Will look to you now John.
Vaith out it must, as good at night, as morning.
I am ene as vull as a Pipers bag with joy,
Or a great Gun upon carnation day!
I could weep Lions tears to see you John.
It Is but two viftie pounds I have ventured for you:
But now I have you, you shall pay whole hundred.
Run from your Buroughs, son: faith ene be hanged.
An' you once earth your self, John, in the barn,
I have no Daughter vor you: Who did verret 'hun.

My Ladies son, the Squire here, vetch'd 'hun out.
Puppy had put us all in such a vright,
We thought the Devil was in the barn; and no body
Durst venture of hun.

I am now resolved,
Who shall have my Daughter.

Who?

He best deserves her.
Here comes the Vicar. Chanon Hugh, we have vound
John Clay again! the matter's all come round.

Is Metaphore returned yet?

All is turned
Here to confusion: we have lost our plot;
I fear my man is run away with the money,
And Clay is found, in whom old Turfe is sure
To save his stake.

What shall we do then Justice?

The Bride was met in the young Squires hands.

And what is become of her?

None here can tell.

Was not my Mothers man, Pol-marten, with you?
And a strange Gentlewoman in his company,
Of late here, Chanon?

Yes, and I dispatched 'hem.

Dispatched 'hem! how do you mean?

Why married 'hem.
As they desired; But now.

And do you know
What you have done, Sir Hugh?

No harm, I hope.

You have ended all the Quarrel. Awdrey is married.

Married! to whom?

My Daughter Awdrey married,
And she not know of it!

Nor her Father, or Mother!

Whom has she married?

Your Pol-marten, Madam.
A Groom was never dreamt of.

Is he a man?

That he is Turfe, and a Gentleman, I have made him.

Nay, an' he be a Gentleman, let her shift.

She was so brave, I knew her not, I swear;
And yet I married her by her own name.
But she was so disguised, so Lady-like;
I think she did not know her self the while!
I married 'hem as a mere p^^re of strangers:
And they gave out themselves for such.

I wish 'hem
Much joy, as they have given me hearts ease.

Then Madam, I Will entreat you now remit
Your jealousy of me; and please to take
All this good company home with you, to supper:
We Will have a merry night of it, and laugh.

A right good motion, Squire; which I yield to:
And thank them to accept it. Neighbor Turfe,
I Will have you merry, and your wife: And you,
Sir Hugh, be pardoned this your happy error.
By Justice Preamble, your friend and patron.

If the young Squire can pardon it, I do.

Stay my dear Dido, and good Vicar Hugh,
We have a business with you: In short, this
If you dare knit another pair of strangers,
Dido of Carthage, and her Countryman,
Stout Hanniball stands to it. I have asked consent,
And she has granted.

But says Dido so?

From what Ball-Hanny has said, I dare not go.

Come in then, I Will dispatch you. A good supper
Would not be lost, good company, good discourse;
But above all where wit has any source.

After the hoping of your pardon, Madam,
For many faults committed. Here my wife,
And I do stand expecting your mild doom.

I wish thee joy Pol-marten; and thy wife:
As much, Mrs. Pol-marten. Thou have tricked her
Up very fine, me thinks.

For that I made
Bold with your Ladyships Wardrobe, but have trespassed
Within the limits of your leave -- I hope.

I give her what she wears. I know all women
Love to be fine. Thou have deserved it of me:
I am extremely pleased with thy good fortune.
Welcome good Justice Preamble; And Turfe,
Look merrily on your Daughter: She has married
A Gentleman.

So me thinks; I dare not touch her
She is so fine: yet I will say, God bless h^^.

And I too, my fine Daughter. I could love her
Now, twice as well, as if Clay had her.

Come, come, my Mother is pleased. I pardon all,
Pol-marten in, and wait upon my Lady.
Welcome good Ghests: see supper be served in,
With all the plenty of the house, and worship.
I must confer with Mr. In-and-In,
About some alterations in my Masque;
Send Hilts out to me: Bid him bring the Council
Of Finsbury hither. I Will have such a night
Shall make the name of Totten-Court immortal:
And be recorded to posterity.

O Mr. In-and-In, what have you done?

Surveyed the place Sir, and designed the ground,
Or stand still of the work: And this it is.
First, I have fixed in the earth, a Tub;
And an old Tub, like a Salt-Peeter Tub,
Preluding by your Fathers name Sir Peeter,
And the antiquity of your house, and family,
Original from Salt-Peeter.

Good y faith,
You have shown reading, and antiquity here, Sir.

I have a little knowledge in design,
Which I can vary Sir to Infinite.

Ad Infinitum Sir you mean.

I do.
I stand not on my Latin, I Will invent,
But I must be alone then, joined with no man.
This we do call the Stand-still of our work.

Who are those we? you now joined to your self.

I mean my self still, in the plural number,
And out of this we raise our Tale of a Tub.

No, Mr. In-and-In, my Tale of a Tub.
By your leave, I am Tub, the Tale's of me,
And my adventures! I am Squire Tub,
Subjectum Fabulae.

But I the Author.

The Worke-man Sir! the Artificer! I grant you.
So Skelton-Lawreat; was of Elinour Bumming:
But she the subject of the Rout, and Tunning.

He has put you to it, Neighbor In-and-In.

Do not dispute with him, he still will win.
That paies for all.

Are you revised o'that?
A man may have wit, and yet put off his hat.

Now, Sir this Tub, I will have capt with paper:
A fine oild Lanterne-paper, that we use.

Yes every Barber, every Cutler has it.

Which in it does contain the light to the business.
And shall with the very vapor of the Candle,
Drive all the motions of our matter about:
As we present 'hem. For example, first
The worshipful Lady Tub.

Right worshipful,
I pray you, I am worshipful my self.

Your Squire-ships Mother, passes by (her Huisher,
Mr. Pol-marten bareheaded before her)
In her velvet Gown.

But how shall the Spectators?
As it might be, I, or Hilts, know it is my Mother?
Or that Pol-marten there that walks before her.

O we do nothing, if we clear not that.

You have seen none of his works Sir?

All the postures
Of the trained bands of the Country.

All their colors.

And all their Captains.

All the Cries of the City:
And all the trades in their habits.

He has his whistle
Of command: Seat of authority!
And virge to' interpret, tip'd with silver, Sir
You know not him.

Well, I will leave all to him:

Give me the brief of your subject. Leave the whole
State of the thing to me.

Supper is ready, Sir.
My Lady calls for you.

I Will send it you in writing.

Sir, I will render feazible, and facile,
What you expect.

Hilts, be it your care,
To see the Wise of Finsbury made welcome:
Rosin sent for?

He Is come within.

Lord! what a world of business
The Squire dispatches!

He is a learned man:
I think there are but view of the Innes of Court,


Care to fit 'un then.

Yonder Is another wedding, Master Basket,
Brought in by Vicar Hugh.

what are they, Jack?

The High Constables Man, Ball Hanny; and Mrs. Wispes,
Our Ladies woman.

And are the Table merry?

There Is a young Tile-maker makes all laugh;
He will not eat his meat, but cries at the board,
He shall be hanged.

He has lost his wench already:
As good be hanged.

Was she that is Pol-marten,
Our fellows Mistress, wench to that sneake- John?

I faith, Black Jack, he should have been her Bridegroom:
But I must go to wait of my wise Masters.
Jack, you shall wait on me, and see the Mask anon:
I am half Lord Chamberlin, in my Masters absence.

Shall we have a Masque? Who makes it?

In-and-In.
The Maker of Islington: Come go with me
To the sage sentences of Finsbury.

Come, give us in the great Chair, for my Lady;
And set it there: and this for Justice Bramble.

This for the Squire my Master, on the right hand.

And this for the High Constable.

This his wife.

Then for the Bride, and Bridegroom, here Pol-marten.

And she Pol-marten, army Ladies feet.

Right.

And beside them Mr. Hanniball Puppy.

And his she Puppy, Mrs. Wispe that was:
Here Is all are in the note.

No, Mr. Vicar:
The petty Chanon Hugh.

And Cast-by Clay:
There they are all.

Then cry a Hall, a Hall!
It Is merry in Tot tenham Hall, when beards wag all.
Come Father Rozin with your Fidle now,


Neighbors, all welcome: Now does Totten-Hall
Show like a Court: and hence shall first be called so.
Your witty short confession Mr. Vicar,
Within has been the Prologue, and has opened
Much to my sons device, his Tale of a Tub.

Let my Masque show it self: And In-and-In,
The Architect, appear; I hear the whistle.

Thus rise I first, in my light linen breeches,
To run the meaning over in short speeches.
Here is a Tub; A Tub of Totten-Court:
An ancient Tub, has called you to this sport:
His Father was a Knight, the rich Sir Peeter;
Who got his wealth by a Tub, and by Salt-Peeter:
And left all to his Lady Tub; the mother
Of this bold Squire Tub, and to no other.
Now of this Tub, and's deeds, not done in ale,
Observe, and you shall see the very Tale.

Here Chanon Hugh, first brings to Totten-Hall
The high Constables council, tells the Squire all;
Which, though discovered (give the Devil his due:)
The wise of Finsbury do still pursue.
Then with the Justice, does he counterplot,
And his Clarke Metaphore, to cut that knot:
Whilst Lady Tub, in her sad velvet Gown,
Missing her son, does seek him up and down.

With her Pol-marten bare before her.

Yes, I have expressed it here in figure, and Mistress Wispe her woman, holding up
her train


In The next page, report your second strain.

Here the high Constable, and Sages walk
To Church, the Dame, the Daughter, Bride-maids talk,
Of wedding business; till a fellow in comes,
Relates the robbery of one Captain Thum's:
Charge the Bridegroom with it: Troubles all,
And gets the Bride; who in the hands does fall
Of the bold Squire, but thence soon is taken
By the sly Justice, and his Clarke profane
In shape of Pursuyvant; which he not long
Holds, but betrays all with his trembling tongue:
As truth will break out, and show, etc.

O thou have made him kneel there in a corner,
I see now: there is simple honor for you Hilts!

Did I not make him to confess all to you?

True; In-and-In has done you right, you see.
Thy third I pray thee, witty In-and-In.

The Squire commends 'un. He does like all well.

He cannot choose. This is gear made to sell.

The careful Constable, here drooping comes,
In his deluded search, of Captain Thum's.
Puppy brings word, his Daughter's run away.
With the tall Serving-man. He frights Groom Clay,
Out of his wits. Returns then the Squire,
Mocks all their pains, and gives Fame out a Liar:
For falsely charging Clay, when 'twas the plot,
Of subtle Bramble, who had Awdrey got,
Into his hand, by this winding device.
The Father makes a reskue in a trice:
And with his Daughter, like Saint George on foot,
Comes home triumphing, to his dear Heart root.
And tell's the Lady Tub, whom he meets there,
Of her sons courtesies, the Bachelor.
Whose words had made 'hem fall the Huy and Cry.
When Captain Thum's coming to ask him, why
He had so done? He cannot yield him cause:
But so he runs his neck into the Laws.

The Laws, who have a noose to crack his neck,
As Justice Bramble tells him, who does peck
A hundredth pound out of his purse, that comes
Like his teeth from him, unto Captain Thum's.
Thum's is the Vicar in a false disguise:
And employes Metaphore, to fetch this prize.
Who tells the secret unto Basket-Hilts,
For fear of beating. This the Squire quilts
Within his Cap; and bids him but purloine
The wench for him: they two shall share the coin.
Which the sage Lady in her 'foresaid Gown
Breaks off, returning unto Kentish-Towne,
To seek her Wispe; taking the Squire along,
Who finds Clay John, as hidden in straw throng.

O, how am I beholden to the Inventer,
That would not, on record against me enter!
My slacknesse here, to enter in the barn,
Well In-and-In, I see thou can discern!

On with your last, and come to a Conclusion.

The last is known, and needs but small infusion
Into your memories, by leaving in
These Figures as you sit. I, In-and-In,
Present you with the show: First of a Lady
Tub, and her son, of whom this Masque here, made I.
Then Bridegroom Pol, and Mistress Pol the Bride:
With the sub-couple, who sit them beside.

That only verse, I altered for the better, (...) gratid.

Then Justice Bramble, with Sir Hugh the Chanon:
And the Bride's Parents, which I will not stan'on,
Or the lost Clay, with the recovered Giles:
Who thus unto his Master, him 'conciles,
On the Squires word, to pay old Turfe his Club,
And so does end our Tale, here, of a Tub.

THis Tale of me, the Tub of Totten-Court,
A Poet, first invented for your sport.
Wherein the fortune of most empty Tubs
Rolling in love, are shown; and with what rubs,
We Are commonly encountered: When the wit
Of the whole Hundred so opposes it.
Our petty Chanon's forked plot in chief,
Sly Justice arts, with the High Constables Brief,
And brag Commands; my Lady Mothers care;
And her Pol-martens fortune; with the rare
Fate of poor John, thus tumbled in the Caske;
Got In-and-In, to gi't you in a Masque:
That you be pleased, who come to see a Play,
With those that hear, and mark not what we say.
Wherein the Poets fortune is, I fear,
Still to be early up, but nere the near.


