News, news, news.


Bold, and brave new!


New as the night they are borne in;


Or the Phant'sie that begot'hem.


Excellent news!


Will you hear any news?


Yes, and thank you too sir; what is the price of'hem?


Price, Cocks-combe! what price, but the price of your ears? As if any man used
to pay for any thing here


Come forward, you should be some dull tradesman by your pigheaded Sconce now,
that think there is nothing good any where; but what is to be sold


Indeed I am all for sale Gentlemen, you say true, I am a Printer, and a
Printer of News; and I do hearken after'hem, where ever they be at any rates;
I Will give any thing for a good Copy now, be it true or false, so't be news


A fine youth!


And I am for matter of State Gentlemen, by consequence, story, my Chronicle,
to fill up my great book, which must be three Reame of paper at least; I have
agreed with my Stationer aforehand to make it so big, and I want for ten quire
yet. I have been here ever since seven a clock in the morning to get matter for
one page, and I think I have it complete; for I have both noted the number,
and the capacity of the degrees here; and told twice over how many candles
there are in the room lighted, which I will set you down to a snuff precisely,
because I love to give light to posterity in the truth of things


This is a finer youth!


Gentlemen, I am neither Printer, nor Chronologer, but one that otherwise take
pleasure i'my Pen: A Factor of news for all the Shieres of England; I do
write my thousand Letters a week ordinary, sometim twelve hundred, and
maintain the business at some charge, both to hold up my reputation with mine
own ministers in Town, and my friends of correspondence in the Country; I
have friends of all rancks, and of all Religions, for which I keep an
answering Catalogue of dispatch; wherein I have my Puritan news, my Protestant
news, and my Pontificiall news


A Superlative this!


And I have hope to erect a Staple for news ere long, whether all shall be
brought, and thence again vented under the name of Staple-newes; and not
trusted to your printed Conundrums of the serpent in Sussex, or the witches
bidding the Devil to dinner at Derbie: News, that when a man sends them down
to the Shieres where they are said to be done, were never there to be found


Sir that is all one, they were made for the common people; and why should not
they have their pleasure in believing of lies are made for them, as you have in
Paul's that make'hem for your selves


There he speaks reason to you sir.


I confess it, but it is the Printing I am offended at, I would have no news
printed; for when they are printed they leave to be news; while they are
written, though they be false, they remain news still


See men's diverse opinions! It is the Printing of'hem makes 'hem news to a great
many, who will indeed believe nothing but what is in Print. For those I do
keep my Presses, and so many Pens going to bring forth wholesome relations,
which once in half a score years (as the age grows forgetful) I Print over
again with a new date, and they are of excellent use


Excellent abuse rather.


Mr. Chronicler do not you talk, I shall --


Nay Gentlemen, be at peace one with another; we have enough for you all
three, if you dare take upon trust


I dare, I assure you.


And I, as much as comes.


I dare too, but nothing so much as I ha'done; I have been so cheated with
false relations i'my time, as I have found it a far harder thing to correct my
book, then collect it


Like enough; but to your news Gentlemen, whence come they?


From the Moon, ours sir.


From the Moon! which way? by sea? or by Land?


By Moone-shine, a nearer way I take it.


Oh by a Trunck! I know it, a thing no bigger than a Flute-case; A neighbor of
mine, a spectacle-maker, has drawn the Moon through it at the boar of a
whistle, and made it as great as a Drum-head twenty times, and brought it
within the length of this Room to me, I know not how often


Tut, that is no news; your perplexive Glasses are common. No, it will fall out
to be Pythagoras way I warrant you, by writing, and reading in the Moon


Right, and as well read of you, In Faith: for Cornelius Agrippa has it, In
disco Lunae, there it is found


Sir, you are lost I assure you; for ours came to you neither by the way of
Cornelius Agrippa, nor Cornelius Drible


Nor any glass of --


No Philosophers fantasy.


Methematicians Perspicill.


Or brother of the Rosy crosses intilligence, no forced way, but by the neat
and clean power of Poetry


The Mistress of all discovery.


Who after a world of these curious uncertainties, has employed thither a
servant of hers in search of truth: who has been there --


In the Moon.


In person.


And is this night returned.


Where? which is he? I must see his Dog at his girdle, and the bush of thorns
at his back, ere I believe it


Do not trouble your faith then, for if that bush of thorns should prove a
goodly Grove of Oaks; in what case were you, and your expectation


Those are stale Ensigns of the Stages, man in the Moon, deliverd down to you
by musty Antiquity, and are of as doubtful credit as the makers


Sir, nothing again Antiquity I pray you, I must not hear ill of Antiquity.


Oh! you have an old Wife belike, or your venerable Jerkin there, make much
of'hem: Our relation I tell you still is news


Certain, and sure news.


Of a new World,


And new creatures in that World.


In the Orb of the Moon.


Which is now found to be an Earth inhabited!


With navigable Seas, and Rivers.


Variety of Nations, Polities, Laws.


With Havens in it, Castles, and Port-Townes!


Inland Cities, Boroughes, Hamlets, Faires, and Markets!


Hundreds, and Weapontakes! Forests, Parks, Coney-ground, Meadow-pasture, what
not


But differing from ours.


And has your Poet brought all this?


Troth, here was enough; it is a pretty piece of Poetry as'tis.


Would you could hear on, though.


Gi' your minds to it a little.


What Innes, or Alehouses are there there? does he tell you?


Truly I have not asked him that.


Nor were you best, I believe.


Why, in travail a man knows these things without offense; I am sure if he be
a good Poet, he has discovered a good Tavern in his time


That he has, I should think the worse of his Verse else.


And his Prose too in faith.


Is he a Man's Poet, or a Woman's Poet I pray you?


Is there any such difference?


Many, as betwixt your man's Tailor, and your woman's Tailor.


How? may we beseech you?


I Will show you; your Man's Poet may break out strong and deep in the mouth, as he
said of Pindar, Monte decurrens velut amnis. But your Woman's Poet must flow,
and stroke the ear, and (as one of them said of himself sweetly) Must write a
Verse as smooth, and calm as Cream
In which there is no torrent, nor scarce stream.



Have you any more on it?


No, I could never arrive but to this Remnant.


Pity! would you had had the whole piece for a pattern to all Poetry.


How might we do to see your Poet? did he undertake this journey (I pray you)
to the Moon o'foot


Why do you ask?


Because one of our greatest Poets (I know not how good a one) went to
Endenburgh of foot, and came back; marry he has been restive they say ever
since, for we have had nothing from him; he has set out nothing I am sure


Like enough, perhaps he has not all in, when he has all in, he he will set out
(I warrant you) at least those from whom he had it, it is the very same party
that has been in the Moon now


Indeed! has he been there since? belike he rid thither then.


Yes Post, upon the Poets horse for a wager.


No I assure you, he rather flew upon the wings of his Muse. There are in all
but three ways of going thither; one is Endymions way, by rapture in sleep,
or a dream. The other Minipus his way, by wing, which the Poet took. The the
third, old Empedocles way; who when he leapt into Aetna, having a dry sear
body, and light, the smoke took him and whift him up into the Moon, where he
lives yet waving up and down like a feather, all soot and embers coming out
of that cole-pit; our Poet met him, and talked with him


In what language good sir?


Only by signs and gestures, for they have no articulate voices there, but
certain motions to music: all the discourse there is harmony


A fine Lunatique language in faith; how do their Lawyers then?


They are Pythagorians, all dumb as fishes, for they have no controversies to
exercise themselves in


How do they live then?


O'th deaw o'th Moon like Grasshoppers, and confer with the Doppers.


Have you Doppers?


A world of Doppers! but they are there as lunatic persons, walkers only;
that have leave only to hum, and ha, not daring to prophecy, or start up upon
stools to raise doctrine


The brethren of the Rosie-Crosse have their College within a mile of the
Moon; a Castle in the air that runs upon wheels with a winged lantern --


Tha' seen't in print.


All the fantastical creatures you can think of, are there.


It Is to be hoped there are women there then?


And zealous women, that will out-grone, the groaning wives of Edinburgh.


And Lovers as phantasticke as ours?


But none that will hang themselves for Love, or eat candles ends, or drink
to their Mistresse-eyes, till their own bid'hem good night, as the Sublunary
Lovers do


No sir?


No, some few you shall have, that sigh or whistle themselves away; and those
are presently hung up by the heels like Meteors, with Squibs in their tails,
to give the wiser sort warning


Excellent!


Are there no selfe-Lovers there?


There were, but they are all dead of late for want of Tailors.


S'light what luck is that? we could have spared them a Colonie from hence.


I think some two or three of them live yet, but they are turned Moone-Calves
by this


O, I, Moone-Calves! what Monster is that I pray you?


Monster? none at all; a very familiar thing, like our fool here on earth.


The Ladies there, play with them instead of little Dogs.


Then there are Ladies?


And Knights, and Squires.


And servants, and Coaches?


Yes, but the Coaches are much of the nature of the Ladies, for they go only
with wind


Prittie, like China-waggons.


Have they any places of meeting with their Coaches, and taking the fresh open
air, and then covert when they please, as in our Hide-Parke, or so


Above all the Hide-parkes in Christendom, far more hiding and private, they
do all in clouds there; they walk in the clouds, they sit in the clouds, they
lie in the clouds, they ride and tumble in the clouds, their very Coaches are
clouds


But have they no Carmen to meet and break their Coaches?


Alas! Carmen, they will over a Carman there, as he will do a Child here; you
shall have a Coachman with cheeks like a trumpeter, and a wind in his mouth
blow him before him as far as he can see him; or skirre over him with his
batts wings a mile and a half, ere he can steer his wry neck to look where
he is


And they have their new Wells too, and physical waters I hope to visit all
time of year


Your Tunbridge, or the Spaw it self are mere puddle to'em: When the pleasant
months of the year come, they all flock to certain broken Islands which are
called there, the Isles of delight


By clouds still?


What else? Their Boats are clouds too.


Or in a mist; the mists are ordinary in the Moon, a man that owes money there,
needs no other protection; only buy a mist and walk in it, he is never
discerned, a matter of a Baubee does it


Only one Island they have, is called the Isle of the Epecaenes, because there
under one Article both kinds are signified, for they are fashioned alike, male
and female the same, not heads and broad hats, short doublets, and long points;
neither do they ever untrusse for distinction, but laugh and lie down in
Moone-shine, and stab with their ponyards; you do not know the delight of the
Epicaenes in Moonshine


And when they have tasted the springs of pleasure enough, and bild, and kissed,,
and are ready to come away; the she is only lay certain eggs (for they are
never with Child there,) and of those eggs are disclosed a race of Creatures
like men, but are indeed a sort of Foul, in part covered with feathers (they
call 'hem Volatees), that hop from Island to Island, you shall see a covey
of'hen if you please presently


Yes faith, it is time to exercise their eyes, for their ears begin to be weary.


Then know, we do not move these wings so soon,
On which our Poet mounted to the Moon
Menippus-like; but all twixt it and us,
Thus cleares and helps to the presentment, thus.

WE have all this while (though the Muses Heralds) adventured to tell your
Majesty no news; for hitherto we have moved rather to your delight, than your
belief. But now be pleased to expect a more noble discovery worthy of your
ear, as the object will be your eye; A race of your own, formed, animated,
lightened, and heightened by you, who rapt above the Moon far in speculation of
your virtues, have remained their intranc'd certain hours, with wonder of the
piety, wisdom, Majesty reflected by you, on them, from the Divine light, to
which only you are less. These by how much higher they have been carried
from earth to contemplate your greatness, have now conceived the more haste
and hope in this their return home to approach your goodness; and led by that
excellent likeness of your self, the truth, imitating Procritus endeavor,
that all their motions be formed to the music of your peace, and have their
ends in your favor, which alone is able to resolve and thaw the cold they have
presently contracted in coming through the colder Region


HOw ere the brightness may amaze,
Move you, and stand not still at gaze,
As dazeled with the light;
But with your motions fill the place,
And let their fullness win your Grace,
Till you collect your sight.
So while the warmth you do confess,
And temper of these Rays no less,
To quicken then refine:
You may by knowledge grow more bold,
And so more able to behold
The body whence they shine.
NOw look and see in yonder throne,
How all those beams are cast from one.
This is that Orb so bright,
Has kept your wonder so awake;
Whence you as from a mirror take
The Suns reflected light.
Read him as you would do the book
Of all perfection, and but look
What his proportions be;
No measure that is thence contrived,
Or any motion thence derived,
But is pure harmony.
NOt that we think you weary be,
for he
That did this motion give,
And made it so long live,
Could likewise give it perpetuity.
Nor that we doubt you have not more,
and store
Of changes to delight,
For they are infinite,
As is the power that brought forth those before.
But since the earth is of his name,
and fame
So full you cannot add,
Be both the first, and glad
To speak him to the Region whence you came.
Look, look already where I am,
bright fame,
Got up unto the sky,
thus high,
Upon my better wing,
to sing
The knowing King,
And make the music here,
With yours on earth the same.
Join then to tell his name,
and say but JAMES is he;
All ears will take the voice,
And in the tune rejoice,
Or truth has left to breath, and fame has left to be.
See, what is that this music brings,
And is so carried in the air about?

Fame that does nourish the renown of Kings,
And keeps that fair, which envy would blot out.


