WHat softer sounds are these salute the Ear
From the large Circle of the Hemispheare,
As if the Center of all sweets met here!

It is the breath, and Soul of every thing,
Put forth by Earth, by Nature, and the Spring,
To speak the Welcome, Welcome of the King.

The joy of plants. The spirit of flowers,

The waters murmr; with the showers
Distilling on the new-fresh hours:
The whistling winds, and birds, that sing
The Welcome of our great, good King.
Welcome, O Welcome, is the general voice,
Wherein all Creatures practice to rejoice.

WHen was old Sherewood's head more quaintly curled?
Or looked the Earth more green upon the world?
Or Natures Cradle mere inchas'd, and purl'd?
When did the Air so smile, the Winds so chime?
As Quiristers of Season, and the Prime!

If what they do, be done in their due time.

He makes the time for whom 't is done,
From whom the warmth, heat, life, begun,
Into whose fostring arms do run
All that have being from the Sun.
Such is the fount of light, the King,
The heart, that quickens every thing,
And makes the Creatures language all one voice;
In Welcome, Welcome, Welcome, to rejoice:
Welcome is all our Song, is all our sound,
The Treble part, the Tenor, and the Ground.

THe King, and the Lords being come down, and ready to take horse, In the
Crowd were discovered two notorious persons, and men of business, as by their
eminent dressing, and habits did soon appear

One in a costly Cassock of black Buckram girt unto him, whereon was painted
Party-per pale: A.B.C. etc

The other in a Taberd, or Heralds Coat of Azure, and Gules quarterly changed
of Buckram; Limn'd with yellow, in stead of Gold, and pasted over with old
Records of the two Shires, and certain fragments of the Forest, as a Coat of
Antiquity, and President, willing to be seen, but heard to be read, and is
loath to be understood, without the Interpreter, who wore it: For the wrong end
of the letters were turned upward, therefore was a labell fixed to, To the
Curious Prier, advertising: Look not so near, with hope to understand
Out-cept, Sir, you can read with the left hand.


Their Names were, Accidence, Fitz-Ale.

BY your fair leave Gentlemen of Court; for leave is ever fair being asked;
and granted is as light, according to our English Proverb, Leave is light.
Which is the King I pray you


Or rather the Kings Lieutenant? For we have nothing to say to the King, till
we have spoken with my Lord Lieutenant


Of Nottinghamshire.


And Darbyshire, for he is both. And we have business to both sides of him
from either of the Counties


As far as his Command stretches.


Is this he?


This is no great man by his timber (as we say in the Forest) by his thewes he
may. I Will venture a Part of Speech, two, or three at him; to see how he is
declined. My Lord, Pleases your good Lordship, I am a poor Neighbor, here,
of your Honors, in the County


Mr. A-B-Cee Accidence, my good Lord, Schoolmasters of Mansfield, the painful
Instructor of our Youth in their Country elements, as appears by the sign
of correction, in his hat, with the trust of the Towne-Pen-and-Inkehorne,
committed to the Sure-tie of his Girdle, from the whole Corporation


This is the more remarkable man, my very good Lord; Father Fitz-ale, Herald
of Darbie, Light, and Lantern of both Counties; the learned Antiquarie of the
North: Conserver of the Records of either Forest, as witnesses the brief
Tabard, or Coat Armor he carries, being an industrious Collection of all the
written, or reported Wonders of the Peake

SAint Anne of Buxstons boiling Well,
Or Elden bottomless, like Hell:
Pooles-hole, or Satan's sumptuous Arse,
(Surreverence) with the Mine-mens Farce.
Such a light, and metall'd Dance
Saw you never yet in France.
And by Lead-men, for the nonce,
That turn round like grindlestones:
Which they dig out fro' the Delves,
For their Bairnes-bread, Wives, and sell's:
Whom the Whetstone sharpes to eat,
And cry Milstones are good meat.
He can fly over hills, and dales,
And report you more odd tales,
Of our Outlaw Robinhood
That revell'd here in Sherewood;
And more stories of him show
(Though he never shot in his Bow.)
Then au' men, or believe, or know.

Stint, stint, your Court,
Grow to be short,
Throw by your Clatter,
And handle the matter:
We come with our Peers,
And crave your ears,
To present a Wedding,
Intended a bedding,
Of both the Shires.
Father FitZ-ale
Has a Daughter stale
In Darbie-Towne,
Known, up, and down
For a geat Antiquity:
And Pem she hight
A solemn Wight
As you should meet
In any street,
In that Ubiquitie.
Her, he has brought
As having sought
By many a draught
Of Ale, and Craft;
With skill to graft
In some old Stock,
OF the Yeoman block,
And Forrest-blood,
Of old Sherewood.
And he has found
Within the ground,
At last no Shrimpe,
Whereon to impe,
His jolly Club,
But a bold Stub
OF the right wood,

A Champion good;
Who here in place,
Presents himself,
Like doughtie Elfe,
Of Greenwood Chase.

Here Stub the Bridegroom presented himself, being apparelled in a yellow
Canvas Doublet, cut, a green Jerkin, and Hose, like a Ranger. A Munmouth Cap,
with a yellow Feather, yellow Stockings, and Shoes, for being to dance, he
would not trouble himself with Boots

Stub of Stub-hall,
Some do him call;
But most do say
He Is Stub, will stay;
To run his race,
Not run away

At Quintin, he,
In honor of this Bridaltee,
Has challenged either wide Countee;
Come Cut, and Long-taile. For there be
Six Batchelers, as bold as he,
Adjuting to his Companee,
And each one has his Liverie;

Six Hoods they are, and of the blood,
They tell of ancient Robinhood.
Here the six Hoods presented themselves severally, in their Livory Hoods,
whilst FitZ-ale spoke on

Red-hood the first that does appear
In Stamel.

Scarlet is too dear.

Then Green-hood.

He Is in Kendal Green,
As in the Forest Color seen.

Next Blew-hood is, and in that hue
Does vaunt a heart as pure, and true
As is the Sky; (give him his due.)

Of old England the Yeoman blew.

Then Tawney fra' the Kirk that came.

And cleped was the Abbots man.

With Motley-hood, the Man of Law.

And Russet-hood keeps all in Awe.
Bold Batchelers they are, and large,
And come in at the Country charge;
Horse, Bridles, Saddles, Stirrups, Girts,
All reckoned of the County skirts!
And all their Courses, miss, or hit,
Intended are, for the Sheere-wit,
And so to be received. Their game
Is Country sport, and has a name
From the Place that bears the cost,
Else all the Fat in the Fire were lost.
Go Captain Stub, lead on, and show
What house you come on, by the blow
You give Sir Quintin, and the Cuffe,
You escape of the Sand-bags Counterbuffe.

O well run, Yeoman Stub!
Thou have knocked it, like a Club,
And made Sir Quintin know:
By this his race so good;
He himself is also wood;
As by his furious blow.

Bravely run Red-hood,
There was a shock,
To have buff'd out the blood
From ought but a block.

Well run Green-hood, got between,
Under the Sand-bag, he was seen,
Lowting low, like a For'ster green:

He knows his tackle, and his treene.

Gi' the old England Yeoman his due,
H' has hit Sir Quin: just in the Qu:
Though that be black, yet he is blew.
It is a brave patch, and a new!

Well run Tawney, the Abbots Churl
His Jade gave him a Jerk,
As he woul' have his Rider hurl
His Hood after the Kirk.
But he was wiser, and well beheft,
For this is all, that he has left.

Or the Saddle turned round, or the Girths brake,
For low on the ground (wo' for his sake)
The Law is found.

Had his pair of tongues, not so much good,
To keep his head, in his Motley-hood?

Russet ran fast, though he be thrown,

He lost no stirrup, for he had none.
1. His horse, it is the Heralds weft.
2. No it is a mare, and has a cleft.
3. She is Countrey-borrow'd, and no veil,
But's hood is forfeit to FitZ-ale.
Here Accidence did break them of, by calling them to the Dance, and to the
Bride, who was dressed like an old May-Lady, with Skarfes, and a great wrought
Handkerchiefe, with red, and blew, and other habiliments. Six Maids attending
on her, attired, with Buckram Bride-laces beguilt: White sleeves, and Stammell
Petticotes, dressed after the cleanliest Country guise; among whom Mistress
Alphabet, Master Accidence's Daughter, did bear a prime sway

The two Bride Squires, the Cake-bearer, and the Boll-bearer, were in two
yellow leather Doublets, and russet Hose, like two twin-Clownes pressed out for
that office, with Livery Hatts, and Ribbands


Come to the Bride; another fit,
Yet show, Sirs, of your Country wit,
But of your best. Let all the Steel
Of back, and brains fall to the heel;
And all the Quicksilver in the mine
Run in the foot-veines, and refine
Your Firk-hum-Jerk-hum to a Dance,
Shall fetch the Fiddles out of France;
To wonder at the Horne-pipes, here,
Of Nottingham, and Darbishire.

With the Phant'sies of Hey-troll,
Trol about the Bride-all Boll,
And divide the broad Bride-Cake
Round about the Brides-stake.

With, here is to the fruit of Pem,

Grafted upon Stub his Stem,

With the Peakish Nicetie,

And old Sherewoods Vicetie.

The last of which words were set to a Tune, and sung to the Bagpipe, and
Measure of their Dance; the Clownes, and company of Spectators drinking, and
eating the while

Let Us sing about, and say, Hey-trol,
Troll to me the Bridal Boll,
And divide the broad Bride-Cake,
Round about the Brides-stake.
With, Here, is to the fruit of Pem,
Grafted upon Stub his stem;
With the Peakish Nicetie,
And old Sherewoods Vicetie.
But well daunc'd Pem upon record,
Above thy Yeoman, or May-Lord.
Here it was thought necessary they should be broken off, by the coming in of
an Officer, or servant of the Lord Lieutenants, whose face had put on, with his
Clothes, an equal authority for the business

GIve end unto your rudeness: Know at length
Whose time, and patience you have urged, the Kings.
Whom if you knew, and truly, as you ought,
'T would strike a reverence in you, even to blushing,
That King whose love it is, to be your Parent!
Whose Office, and whose Charge, to be your Pastor!
Whose single watch, defends all your sleeps!
Whose labors, are your rests! whose thoughts and cares,
Breed you delights! whose business, all your leasures!
And you to interrupt his serious hours,
With light, impertinent, unworthy objects,
Sights for your selves, and sav'ring your own tast's;
You are too blame. Know your disease, and cure it,
Sports should not be obtruded on great Monarchs,
But wait when they will call for them as servants,
And meanest of their servants, since their price is
At highest, to be styled, but of their pleasures!
Our King is going now to a great work
Of highest Love, Affection, and Example,
To see his Native Country, and his Cradle,
And find those manners there, which he sucked in
With Nurses Milk, and Parents piety!
O Sister Scotland! what have thou deserved
Of joyful England, giving us this King!
What Union (if thou like) have thou not made?
In knitting for Great Britain such a Garland?
And letting him, to wear it? Such a King!
As men would wish, that knew not how to hope
His like, but seeing him! A Prince, that is Law
Unto himself. Is good, for goodnesse-sake;
And so becomes the Rule unto his Subjects!
That studies not to seem, or to show great,
But be! Not dressed for others eyes, and ears,
With Vizors, and false rumors; but make Fame
Wait on his Actions, and thence speak his Name!
O bless his Goings out, and Commings in,
Thou mighty God of Heaven, lend him long
Unto the Nations, which yet scarcely know him,
Yet are most happy, by his Government.
Bless his fair Bed-mate, and their certain Pledges,
And never may he want those nerves in Fate;
For sure Succession fortifies a State.
Whilst he himself is mortal, let him feel
Nothing about him mortal, in his house;
Let him approve his young increasing Charles,
A loyal Son: and take him long to be
An aid, before he be a Successor.
Late, come that day, that Heaven will ask him from us:
Let our Grandchild, and their issue, long
Expect it, and not see it. Let us pray
That Fortune never know to exercise
More power upon him, then as Charles his servant,
And his great Britains slave: ever to wait
Bondwoman to the GENIUS of this State.


