Is seen to come as afar off, accompanied with
Grace, Love, Harmony, Revell, Sport, Laughter.

Let us play, and dance, and sing,
let us now turn every sort;
OF the pleasures of the Spring,
to the graces of a Court.
From air, from cloud, from dreams, from toys,
to sounds, to sense, to love to joys;
Let your shows be new, as strange,
let them often and sweetly vary;
Let them haste so to their change,
as the Seers may not tarry;
Too long to expect the pleasing't sight
does take away from the delight.
Yet hear what your delight does pray
all sour and sullen looks away,
that are the servants of the day,
Our sports are of the humorous night,
Who feeds the stars that give her light,
and uses (then her wont) more bright,
to help the vision of DELIGHT.

See, see her Scepter, and her Crown
are all of flame, and from her gown
a train of light comes waving down.
This night in dew she will not steep
The brain, nor lock the sense in sleep;
but all awake, with Phantomes keep,
and those to make DELIGHT more deep.
Break Phant'sie from thy cave of cloud,
and spread thy purple wings;
Now all thy figures are allowed,
and various shapes of things;
Create of ayrie forms, a stream;
it must have blood, and naught of fleame,
And though it be a waking dream;
Yet let it like an odor rise
to all the Senses here,
And fall like sleep upon their eyes,
or music in their ear.

Bright Night, I obey thee, and am come at thy call
But it is no one dream that can please these all;
Wherefore I would know what Dreams would delight'em;
For never was Phant'sie more loath to affright'em.
And Phant'sie I tell you has dreams that have wings,
And dreams that have honey, and dreams that have stings;
Dreams of the maker, and Dreams of the teller,
Dreams of the kitchen, and Dreams of the Cellar:
Some that are tall, and some that are Dwarffes,
Some that were halter'd, and some that wear scarffes;
Some that are proper, and signify of thing,
And some another, and some that are nothing:
For say the French Verdingale, and the French hood
Were here to dispute; must it be understood
A feather, for a wispe were a fit moderator?
Your Ostritch believe it is no faithful translator
Of perfect Utopian; And then it were an od-piece
To see the conclusion peep forth at a cod-piece.
The politic pudding has still his two ends,
Tho the bellows, and the bag-pipe were never so good friends:
And who can report what offense it would be
For the Squirrell to see a Dog clime a tree?
If a Dream should come in now to make you afeard,
With a Windmill on his head, and bells at his beard;
Would you straight wear your spectacles, here, at your toes,
And your boots of your brows, and your spurs of your nose?
Your Whale he will swallow, a hogs-head for a pill;
But the maker of the mouse-trap, is he that has skill.
And the nature of the Onion, is to draw tears,
As well as the Mustard; peace, pitchers have ears,
And Shitlecocks wings, these things do not mind'em,
If the Bell have any sides, the clapper will find'em:
There Is twice so much music in beating the tabor,
As in the Stock Fish, and somewhat less labor.
Yet all this while, no proportion is boasted
T'wixt an egg, and an Ox, though both have been roasted,
For grant the most Barbers can play of the Citterne,
Is it requisite a Lawyer should plead to a Ghitterne?
You will say now, the Morris-bells were but bribes
To make the heel forget that ever it had kibes;
I say let the wine make never so good jelly,
The conscience of the bottle, is much in the belly:
For why? do but take common Council in your way,
And tell me who will then set a bottle of hay
Before the old Usurer, and to his horse
A slice of salt-butter, perverting the course
Of civil society? open that gap,
And out skip your fleas, four and twenty at a clap,
With a chain and a trundle-bed following at th'heeles,
And will they not cry then, the world runs a wheels:
As for example, a belly, and no face,
With the bill of a Shoveler, may here come in place;
The haunches of a Drum, with the feet of a pot,
And the tail of a Kentishman to it; why not?
Yet would I take the stars to be cruel,
If the Crab, and the Ropemaker ever fight duel,
On any dependence, be it right, be it wrong,
But mum; a thread may be drawn out too long.
Why? this you will say was fantastical now,
As the Cock, and the Bull, the Whale, and the Cow;
But vanish away, I have change to present you,
And such as I hope will more truly content you:
Behold the gold-haird Hour descending here,
That keeps the gate of Heaven, and turns the year,
Already with her sight, how she does cheer,
And makes another face of things appear.
Why look you so, and all turn dumb!
to see the opener of the New-yeare come?
My presence rather should invite,
and aid, and urge, and call to your delight,
The many pleasures that I bring
are all of youth, of heat, of life, and spring,
And were prepared to warm your blood,
not fix it thus as if your Statutes stood.
we see, we hear, we feel, we taste,
we smell the change in every flower,
we only wish that all could last,
and be as new still as the hour.
WONDER must speak, or break; what is this? grows
The wealth of Nature here, or Art? it shows
As if Favonius, father of the Spring,
Who, in the verdant Meads does reign sole king,
Had rowsd him here, and shook his feathers, wet
With purple swelling Nectar? and had let
The sweet and fruitful dew fall on the ground
To force out all the flowers that might be found?
Or a Minerva with her needle had
Th'enamourd earth with all her riches clad,
And made the downie Zephire as he flew
Still to be followd with the Springs best hue?
The gaudie Peacocke boasts not in his train,
So many lights and shadows, nor the rain*
Resolving Iris, when the Sun does court ber,
Nor purple Phesant while his Aunt does sporther
To hear him crow; and with a pearched pride
Wave his dis-coloured neck, and purple side?
I have not seen the place could more surprise,
It looks (me thinks) like one of natures eyes,
Or her whole body set in art? behold!
How the Blew-binde weed does it self infold
With Honey-suckle, and both these intwine
Themselves with Bryonie, and Jessamine,
To cast a kind and odoriferous shade?
How better then they are, are all things made
By WONDER? But a while refresh thine eye,
I Will put thee to thy oftener, what, and why?

Thou will indeed; what better change appears?
Whence is it that the air so sudden cleares,
And all things in a moment turn so mild,
Whose breath or beams, have got proud earth with child,
Of all the treasure that great Natur's worth,
And makes her every minute to bring forth?
How comes it Winter is so quite forced hence,
And locked up under ground? that every sense
Has several objects? Trees have got their heads,
The fields their coats? that now the shining Meads
Do boast the Paunce, the Lilly, and the Rose;
And every flower does laugh as Zephire blows?
That Seas are now more even then the Land?
The Rivers run as smoothed by his hand;
Only their heads are crisped by his stroke:
How plays the Yeareling with his brow scarce broke
Now in the open Grass? and frisking Lambs
Make wanton Salts about their drie-suckt Dams;
Who to repair their bags do rob the fields?
How is it each bough a several music yields?
The lusty Throstle, early Nightingale
Accord in tune, though vary in their tale?
The chirping Swallow called forth by the Sun,
And crested Lark does his division run?
The yellow Bees, the air with murmr fill?
The Finches caroll, and the Turtles bill?
Whose power is this? what God?

Behold a King
Whose presence makes this perpetual Spring,
The glories of which Spring grow in that Bower,
And are the marks and beauties of his power.
It Is he, it is he, and no power else
That makes all this what Phant'sie tells;
The founts, the flowers, the birds, the Bees,
The herds, the flocks, the grass, the trees,
Do all confess him; but most These
Who call him lord of the four Seas,
King of the less and greater Isles,
And all those happy when he smiles.
Advance, his favor calls you to advance,
And do your (this nights) homage in a'dance.
Again, again; you cannot be
Of such a true delight too free,
Which who once saw would ever see;
And if they could the object prize,
Would while it lasts not think to rise,
But wish their bodies all were eyes.
In curious knots and mazes so
The Spring at first was taught to go;
And Zephire, when he came to woo
His Flora, had their motions too,
And thence did Venus learn to lead
The Idalian Braules, and so tread
As if the wind, not she did walk;
Nor pressed a flower, nor bowed a stalk.
I was not wearier where I lay
By frozen Tythons side to night,
Then I am willing now to stay,
And be a part of your delight.
But I am urged by the Day,
Against my will to bid you come away.
They yield to Time, and so must all.
As Night to sport, Day does to action call,
Which they the rather do obey,
Because the Morn, with Roses strew's the way.


