The Inventors, Inigo Jones. Ben. Johnson.

THus, thus, begin the yearly rites
Are due to PAN on these bright nights;
His Morn now rises, and invites
To sports, to dances, and delights:
All Envious, and Profane away,
This is the Shepherds Holy Day.

Strew, strew, the glad and smiling ground
With every flower, yet not confound
The Prime-rose drop, the Springs own spouse,
Bright Dayes-eyes, and the lips of Cowes,
The Garden-star, the Queen of May,
The Rose, to crown the Holy Day.

Drop, drop you Violets, change your hues,
Now red, now pale, as Lovers use,
And in your death go out as well,
As when you lived unto the smell:
That from your odor all may say,
This is the Shepherds Holy Day.

Well done my pretty ones, rain Roses still,
Until the last be drapt: Then hence: and-fill
Your fragrant prickles for a second shower,
Bring Corn-flag, Tulips, and Adonis flower,
Fair Oxe-eye, Goldy-locks, and Columbine,
Pinkes, Goulands, King-cups, and sweet Sops-in-wine,
Blew Harebells, Pagles, Pansies, Calaminth,
Flower-gentle, and the faire-hair'd Hyacinth,
Bring rich Carnations, Floure-de-luces, Lillies,
The chequ'd, and purple-ringed Daffodillies,
Bright Crowne-imperiall, Kings-speare, Holy-hocks,
Sweet Venus Navill, and soft Lady-smocks,
Bring too, some branches forth of Daphnes hair,
And gladdest myrtle for these posts to wear
With Spikenard weaved, and Marjoram between,
And star'd with yellow-golds, and Meadows ^ueene,
That when the Altar, as it ought is dressed,
More odor come not from the Phaenix nest;
The breadth thereof Panchaia may envy,
The colors China, and the light the sky.

Room for an old Trophie of Time; a Son of the sword, a Servant of Mars, the
Minion of the Muses, and a Master of Fence. One that has shown his quarters,
and played his prizes at all the games of Greece in his time; as Fencing,
Wrestling, Leaping, Dancing, what not? And has now ushered hither by the
light of my long-sword certain bold Boys of Baeotia, who are come to
challenge the Arcadians at their own sports, call them forth on their own
holy day, and Dance them down on their own Greene-swarth


It Is boldly attempted, and must be a Baeotian enterprise by the face of it,
from all the parts of Greece else, especially at this time when the best, and
bravest spirits of Arcadia, called together by the excellent Arcas, are yonder
sitting about the Fountain of light, in consultation of what honors they may
do the great Pan by increase of anniversarie rites fitted to the Music of
his peace


Peace to thy Pan, and mum to thy Music, Swain; There is a Tinker of Thebes
a coming, called Epam, with his kettle will make all Arcadia ring of him; What
are your sports for the purpose? say, if singing, you shall be sung down, if
dancing, daunc'd down. There is no more to be done with you, but know what;
which it is; and you are in smoke, gone, vapour'd, vanished, blown, and (as a
man would say) in a word of two sillables, Nothing


This is short, though not so sweet. Surely the better part of the solemnity
here will be dancing


Enough; They shall be met with instantly in their own sphere, the sphere of
their own activitie a dance. But by whom, expect: No Cynaetheian, nor
Satyrs; but (as I said) Boys of Baeotia; things of Thebes, (the Town is
ours, Shepherd) mad merry Greeks, Lads of life, that have no gall in us, but
all air and sweetness. A Tooth-drawer is our Foreman, that if there be but a
bitter tooth in the company, it may be called out at a twitch; he does command
any man's teeth out of his head upon the point of his Poynard; or tickles them
forth with his ryding rod: He draws teeth a horseback in full speed, yet
he will dance a foot, he has given his word: He is yeoman of the mouth to
the whole Brotherhood, and is charged to see their gummes be clean, and their
breath sweet, at a minutes warning. Then comes my learned Theban, the Tinker I
told you of, with his kettle Drum (before and after) a Master of Music, and a
man of metal; He beats the march to the tune of Tickle-foot, Pam, pam, pam,
brave Epam with a nondas. That Is the strain


A high one.


Which is followed by the trace, and tract of an excellent Juggler, that can
juggle with every joint about him, from head to heel. He can do tricks with
his toes, wind silk, and thread Pearl with them, as nimble a fine fellow of
his feet, as his hands: For there is a noble Corne-cutter his companion, has
so pared, and finified them --. Indeed, he has taken it into his care, to
reform the feet of all, and fit all their footing to a form; only ones
play-foot in the company, and he is a Bellowes-mender, allowed who has the
looking to of all their lungs by patent, and by his place is to set that leg
before still, and with his puffes keeps them in breath during pleasure; A
Tinder-box-man to strike new fire into them at every turn, and where he spies
any brave spark that is in danger to go out, plie him with a match presently


A most politic provision.


Nay, we have made our provisions beyond example, I hope. For to these there is
annexed a Clock-keeper, a grave person, as Time himself, who is to see that
they all keep time to a nick, and move every elbow in order, every knee in
compass. He is to wind them up, and draw them down as he sees cause; Then is
there a subtle shrewd-bearded Sir, that has been a Politician, but is now a
maker of Mouse-traps, a great Inginer yet; and he is to catch the Ladies
favors in the Dance with certain cringes he is to make; and to bait their
benevolence. Nor can we doubt of the success, for we have a Prophet amongst
us of that peremptory pate, a Taylour, or master Fashioner, that has found it
out in a painted cloth, or some old hanging (for those are his Library) that
we must conquer in such a time, and such a half time, therefore bids us go on
crosse-leg'd, or however thread the needles of our own happiness, go
through-stitch with all, unwind the clew of our cares, he has taken measure of
our minds, and will fit our fortune to our footing. And to better assure us;
at his own charge, brings his Philosopher with him, a a great Clerk, who
(they say) can write, and it is shrewdly suspected but he can read too: And he
is to take the whole Daunces from the foot by Brachygraphie, and so make a
memorial, if not a map of the business. Come forth lads, and do your own
turns


How like you this Shepherd? was not this gear gotten on a holy day?


Faith, your folly may deserve pardon, because it has delighted: But, beware
of presuming, or how you offer comparison with persons so near Deities. Behold
where they are, that are now forgiven you, whom should you provoke again with
the like, they will justly punish that with anger, which they now dismiss with
contempt, Away

And come you prime Arcadians forth, that taught
By PAN the rites of true society,
From his loud Music, all your manners wraught
And made your Commonwealth a harmony
Commending so to all posterity.
Your innocence from that fair Fount of light
As still you sit without the injury
Of any rudeness, Folly can, or spite:
Dance from the top of the Lycaean mountain
Down to this valley, and with nearer eye
Enjoy, what long in that illumined Fountain
You did far of, but yet with wonder spy.

1. Of PAN we sing, the best of Singers Pan
That taught us swains, how first to tune our lays,
And on the pipe more aires then Phoebus can.
CHO. Hear O you groves, and hills resound his praise.
2. Of Pan we sing, the best of Leaders, Pan
That leads the Nayad's, and the Dryad's forth;
And to their daunces more then Hermes can.

Hear O you groves, and hills, resound his worth.
3. Of Pan we sing, the best of Hunters, Pan
That drives the Heart to seek unused ways,
And in the chase more then Sylvanus can,

Hear, O you groves, and hills resound his praise.
4. Of Pan we sing, the best of Shepherds, Pan,
That keeps our stocks, and us, and both leads forth
To better pastures then great Pales can:

Hear O you groves, and hills resound his worth.
And while his powers, and praises thus we sing
The Valleys let rebound, and all the rivers ring.

PAN is our All, by him we breath, we live,
We move, we are; It Is he our lambs does rear,
Our flocks does bless, and from the store does give
The warm and finer fleeces that we wear.
He keeps away all heates, and colds,
Drives all diseases from our folds:
Makes every where the spring to dwell,
The Ewes to feed, their udders swell;
But if he frown, the sheep (alas)
The Shepherds wither, and the grass.
Strive, strive, to please him then by still increasing thus
The rites are due to him, who does all right for us.

If yet, if yet
Pans orgies you will further fit,
See where the silver-footed Fayes do sit,
The Nymphs of wood and water;
Each trees, and Fountains daughter,
Go take them forth, it will be good
To see some wave it like a wood,
And others wind it like a flood;
In springs,
And rings,
Till the applause it brings,
Wakes Echo from her seat,
The closes to repeat.
( EACH. The closes to repeat)
Echo the truest Oracle on ground,
Though nothing but a sound.
( EACH. Though nothing but a sound.)
Beloved of Pan, the Vallyes Queen
( EACH. The Valleys Queen)
And often heard, though never seen,
( EACH. Though never seen.)

Room, room there: where are you Shepherd? I am come again with my second
part of my bold Bloods, the brave Gamesters: who assure you by me, that they
perceive no such wonder in all is done here, but that they dare adventure
another trial. They look for some sheepish devises here in Arcadia, not
these, and therefore a hall, a hall they demand


Nay, then they are past pity, let them come, and not expect the anger of a
Deity to pursue them, but meet them. They have their punishment with their
fact. They shall be sheep.


O spare me, by the law of Nations, I am but their Ambassador.


You speak in time Sir.


Now let them return with their solid heads, and carry their stupiditie into
Boeotia, whence they brought it, with an emblem of themselves, and their
Country. This is too pure an air for so gross Brains

End you the rites, and so be eased
Of these, and then great Pan is pleased.

Great Pan the Father of our peace, and pleasure,
Who giv'st us all this leisure,
Hear what thy hallowd troop of Herdsmen pray
For this their Holy Day,
And how their vows to Thee, they in Lycaeum pay.
So may our Ewes receive the mounting Rams,
And we bring thee the earliest of our Lambs:
So may the first of all our fells be thine,
And both the beestning of our Goats, and Kine
As thou our folds do still secure,
And keep'st our fountains sweet and pure
Driv'st hence the Wolf, the Tode, the Brock,
Or other vermin from the flock.
That we preserved by Thee, and thou observed by us
May both live safe in shade of thy loved Maenalus.

Now each return unto his Charge,
And though to day you have lived at large,
And well your flocks have fed their fill,
Yet do not trust your hirelings still.
See, yond' they go, and timely do
The office you have put them to,
But if you often give this leave
Your sheep, and you they will deceave.


