THe first thing that presented it self to the sight, was a rich Ornament,
that enclosed the Scaene; in the upper part of which, were great branches of
Foliage growing out of leaves and husks, with a Coronice at the top; and in
the midst was placed a large compartiment composed of Groteske work, wherein
were Harpies with wings and Lions claws, and their hinder parts converted into
leaves and branches: over all was a broken Frontispice, wrought with scrowles
and masque heads of Children; and within this a Table adorned with a lesser
Compartiment, with this Inscription, COELVM BRITANNICVM. The two sides of this
Ornament were thus ordered: First, from the ground arose a square Basement, and
on the Plinth stood a great vaze of gold, richly enchased, and beautified with
Sculptures of great Releine, with frutages hanging from the upper part: At the
foot of this sat two youths naked, in their natural colors; each of these
with one arm supported the Vaze; on the cover of which stood two young women
in Draperies, arm in arm; the one figuring the glory of Princes, and the
other Mansuetude: their other arms bore up an Ovall, in which, to the Kings
Majesty was this Imprese, A Lion with an Imperial Crown on his head; the
word, Animum sub pectore forti: On the other side was the like Composition, but
the design of the Figures varied; and in the Ovall on the top, being borne up
by Nobility and Fecundity, was this Imprese to the Queens Majesty A Lilly
growing with branches and leaves, and three lesser Lillies springing out of the
Stem; the word, Semper inclit a Virtus: All this Ornament was heightened with
Gold, and for the Invention and various composition was the newest and most
gracious that has been done in this place

The Curtain was watchet and a pale yellow in pains, which flying up on the
sudden, discovered the Scaene, representing old Arches, old Palaces, decayed
walls, parts of Temples, Theaters, Basilita's and Therme, with confused heaps
of broken Columns, Bases, Coronices and Statues, lying as underground, and
altogether resembling the ruins of some great City of the ancient Romans, or
civilized Britains. This strange prospect detained the eyes of the Spectators
some time, when to a loud Music Mercury descends; on the upper part of his
Chariot stands a Cock in action of crowing: his habit was a Coat of flame
color girt to him, and a white mantle trimmed with gold and silver; upon his
head a wreath with small falls of white Feathers, a Caduseus in his hand, and
wings at his heels: being come to the ground he dismounts and goes up to the
State

FRom the high Senate of the gods, to You
Bright glorious Twins of Love and Majesty,
Before whose Throne three warlike Nations bend
Their willing knees, on whose Imperial brows
The Regal Circle prints no awful frowns
To fright your Subjects, but whose calmer eyes
Shed joy and safety on their melting hearts
That flow with cheerful loyal reverence,
Come I Cyllenius, Jove's Ambassador:
Not, as of old, to whisper amorous tales
Of wanton love, into the glowing ear
Of some choice beauty in this numerous train;
Those days are fled, the rebel flame is quenched
In heavenly breasts, the gods have sworn by Styx
Never to tempt yielding mortality
To loose embraces. Your exemplar life
Has not alone transfused a zealous heat
Of imitation through your virtuous Court,
By whose bright blaze your Palace is become
The envied pattern of this underworld,
But the aspiring flame has kindled heaven;
The immortal bosoms burn with emulous fires,
Jove rivals your great virtues, Royal Sir,
And Juno, Madam, your attractive graces;
He his wild lusts, her raging jealousies
She lays aside, and through the Olympique hall,
As yours does here, their great Example spreads.
And though of old, when youthful blood conspired
With his new Empire, prone to heats of lust,
He acted incests, rapes, adulteries
On earthly beauties, which his raging Queen,
Swollen with revengefull fury, turned to beasts,
And in despite he retransform'd to Stars,
Till he had filled the crowded Firmament
With his loose Strumpets, and their spurious race,
Where the eternal records of his shame
Shine to the world in flaming Characters;
When in the Crystal myrrour of your reign
He viewed himself, he found his loathsome stains;
And now, to expiate the infectious guilt
Of those detested luxuries, he will chase
The infamous lights from their usurped Sphere,
And drown in the Lethae an flood, their cursed
Both names and memories. In whose vacant rooms
First you succeed, and of the wheeling Orb
In the most eminent and conspicuous point,
With dazeling beams, and spreading magnitude,
Shine the bright Pole-starre of this Hemispheare.
Next, by your side, in a triumphant Chair,
And crowned with Ariadnes Diadem,
Sits the fair Consort of your heart, and Throne;
Diffused about you, with that share of light
As they of virtue have derived from you,
He Will fix this Noble train, of either sex;
So to the British Stars this lower Globe
Shall owe its light, and they alone dispense
To'th' world a pure refined influence.

BY your leave, Mortals. Goodden Cozen Hermes; your pardon good my Lord
Ambassador: I found the tables of your Arms and Titles, in every Inn betwixt
this and Olympus, where your present expedition is registered, your nine
thousandth nine hundred ninety ninth Legation. I cannot reach the policy why
your Master breeds so few Statesmen, it suits not with his dignity that in the
whole Empyraeum there should not be a god fit to send on these honorable
errands but your self, who are not yet so careful of his honor as your own,
as might become your quality, when you are itinerant: the Hosts upon the
highway cry out with open month upon you for supporting pilfery in your train;
which, though as you are the god of petty Larcinry, you might protect, yet you
know it is directly against the new orders, and opposes the Reformation in
Diameter


Peace Rayler, bridle your licentious tongue,
And let this Presence teach you modesty.

Let it if it can; in the mean time I will acquaint it with my condition. Know
(gay people) that though your Poets who enjoy by Patent a particular privilege
to draw ^^^^ne any of the Deities from Twelfnight till Shrovetuesday, at what
time there is annually a most familiar enter course between the two Courts,
have as yet never invited me to these Solemnities, yet it shall appear by my
intrusion this night, that I am a very considerable Person upon these
occasions, and may most properly assist at such entertainments. My name is
Momus-ap-Somnus-ap-Erebus-ap-Chaos-up-Demogorgon-ap-Eternity. My Offices and
Titles are, The Supreme Theomastix, Hupercrittique of manners, Protonotarie of
abuses, Arch-Informer, Dilator General, Universal Calumniator, Eternal
Plaintiff, and perpetual Foreman of the Grand Inquest. My privileges are an
ubiquitary, circumambulatory, speculatory, interrogatory, redargutory immunity
over all the privy lodgings, behind hangings, doors, curtains, through
keyholes, chinkes, windows, about all Veneriall Lobbies, Skonces or Redoubts,
though it be to the surprise of a perdu Page or Chambermaid, in, and at all
Courts of civil and criminal judicature, all Counsels, Consultations, and
Parlamentary Assemblies, where though I am but a Woollsacke god, and have no
vote in the sanction of new laws, I have yet a Praerogative of wresting the
old to any whatsoever interpretation, whether it be to the behoof, or
prejudice, of Jupiter his Crown and Dignity, for, or against the Rights of
either house of Patrician or Plebeian gods. My natural qualities are to make
Jove frown, Juno powt, Mars chafe, Venus blush, Vulcan glow, Saturn quake,
Cynthia pale, Phoebus hide his face, and Mercury here take his heels. My
recreations are witty mischiefs, as when Saturn guelt his father; the Smith
caught his wife and her Bravo in a net of Cobweb-Iron; and Hebe through the
lubricity of the pavement tumbling over the Halfpace, presented the Emblem of
the forked tree, and discovered to the tanned Ethiops the snowie cliffs of
Culabria with the Grotta of Puteolum. But that you may arrive at the perfect
knowledge of me by the familiar illustration of a Bird of mine own feather,
old Peter Aretine, who reduced all the Scepters and Myters of that Age
tributary to his wit, was my Parallel; and Frank Rublais sucked much of my
milk too; but your modern French Hospital of Oratory, is mere counterfeit,
an arrant Mountebanke, for though fearing no other tortures than his Sciatica,
he discourse of Kings and Queens with as little reverence as of Grooms and
Chambermaids, yet he wants their fangteeth, and Scorpions tail; I mean that
fellow, who to add to his stature thinks it a greater grace to dance on his
tiptoes like a Dog in a doublet, than to walk like other men on the soles of
his feet


No more impertinent Trifeler, you disturb
The great Affair with your rude scurrilous chat:
What does the knowledge of your abject state
Concern Joves solemn Message?

Sir, by your favor, though you have a more especial Commission of employment
from Jupiter, and a larger entertainment from his Exchequer, yet as a freeborne
god I have the liberty to travel at mine own charges, without your pass or
countenance Legacine; and that it may appear a sedulous acute observer, may
know as much as a dull flegmatique Ambassador, and wears a treble key to
unlocke the misterious Ciphers of your dark secrecies, I will discourse the
politic state of heaven to this trim Audience. --

-- You shall understand, that Jupiter upon the inspection of I know not what
virtuous Presidents extant (as they say) here in this Court, but as I more
probably ghesle out of the consideration of the decay of his natural abilities,
has before a frequent co^vocation of the Superlunary Peers in a solemn
Oration recanted, disclaimed, and utterly renounced all the lascivious
extravagancies, and riotous enormities of his forepast licentious life, and
taken his oath on Junos Breviary, religiously kissing the two-leav'd book,
never to stretch his limbs more betwixt adulterous sheets, and has with
patheticall remonstrances exhorted, and under strict penalties enjoined a
respective conformity in the several subordinate Deities; and because the
Libertines of Antiquity, the Ribald Poets, to perpetuate the memory and example
of their triumphs over chastity, to all future imitation, have in their
immortal songs celebrated the martyrdom of those Strumpets under the
persecution of the wives, and devolved to Posterity the Pedigrees of their
whores bawds, and bastards; it is therefore by the authority aforesaid enacted,
that this whole Army of Constellations be immediately disbanded and casheerd,
so to remove all imputation of impiety from the Celestial Spirits, and all
lustful influences upon terrestrial bodies; and consequently that there be an
Inquisition erected to exspunge in the Ancient, and suppress in the modern
and succeeding Poems and Pamphlets, all past, present, and future mention of
those abjured heresies, and to take particular notice of all ensuing
incontinences, and punish them in their high Commission Court. Am not I in
election to be a tall Statesman think you, that can repeat a passage at a
Counsell-table thus punctually


I shun in vain the importunity
With which this Snarler vexes all the gods,
Jove cannot escape him: well, what else from heaven?

Heaven! Heaven is no more the place it was; a cloister of Carthusians, a
Monastery of converted gods, Jove is grown old and fearful, apprehends a
subversion of his Empire, and doubts lest Fate should introduce a legal
succession in the legitimate heir, by repossessing the Titanian line, and
hence springs all this innovation. We have had new orders read in the Presence
Chamber, by the Vi-President of Pernassies, too strict to be observed long.
Monopolies are called in, sophistication of wares punished, and rates imposed
on Commodities. Injunctions are gone out to the Nectar Brewers, for the purging
of the heavenly Beverage of a narcotique weed which has rendered the Idaeacs
confused in the Divine intellects, and reducing it to the composition used in
Saturnes Reign. Edicts are made for the restoring of decayed housekeeping,
prohibiting the repayrs of Families to the Metropolis, but this did endanger an
Amazonian mutiny, till the females put on a more masculine resolution of
soliciting businesses in their own persons, and leaving their husbands at
home for stallions of hospitality. Baccus has commanded all Tavernes to be
shut, and no liquor drawn after ten at night. Cupid must go no more so
scandalously naked, but is enjoined to make him breeches though of his mothers
petticotes. Ganimede is forbidden the Bedchamber, and must only minister in
public. The gods must keep no Pages, nor Grooms of their Chamber under the
age of 25. and those provided of a competent stock of beard. Pan may not pipe,
nor Proteus juggle, but by especial permission. Vulcan was brought to an
Oretenus and fined, for driving in a plate of Iron into one of the Suns
Chariot-wheeles and frost-nailing his horses upon the fifth of November last,
for breach of a penal Statute prohibiting work upon Holidays, that being the
annual celebration of the Gygantomachy. In brief, the whole state of the
Hierarchy suffers a total reformation, especially in the point of
reciprocation of conjugall affection. Venus has confessed all her adulteries,
and is received to grace by her husband, who conscious of the great disparity
betwixt her perfections and his deformities, allows those levities as an
equal counterpoize; but it is the prettiest spectacle to see her stroaking
with her Ivory hand his collied cheeks, and with her sinowy fingers combing
his sooty beard. Jupiter too begins to learn to lead his own wife, I left
him practicing in the milky way; and there is no doubt of an universal
obedience, where the Lawgiver himself in his own person observes his decrees
so punctually; who besides to eternize the memory of that great example of
Matrimonial union which he derives from hence, has on his bed chamber door,
and seeling, fretted with stars in capital letters, engraven the Inscription
of CARLOMARIA. This is as much I am sure as either your knowledge or
Instructions can direct you to, which I having in a blunt round tale, without
State-formality, politic inferences, or suspected Rhetorical elegancies,
already delivered, you may now dexteriously proceed to the second part of your
charge, which is the raking of yon heavenly sparks up in the Embers, or
reducing the Aetheriall lights to their primitive opacity, and gross dark
subsistence; they are all unrivited from the Sphere, and hang loose in their
sockets, where they but attend the waving of your Caduce, and immediately they
reinvest their pristine shapes, and appear before you in their own natural
deformities


Momus thou shall prevail, for since thy bold
Intrusion has inverted my resolves,
I must obey necessity, and thus turn
My face, to breath the Thundrers just decree
Against this adulterate Sphere, which first I purge
Of loathsome Monsters, and misshapen forms:
Down from her azure concave, thus I charm
The Lyrnean Hydra, the rough unlick'd Bear,
The watchful Dragon, the storme-boading Whale,
The Centaure, the horned Goatfish Capricorn,
The Snake-heard Gorgon, and fierce Sagittar:
Divested of your gorgeous starry robes,
Fall from the circling Orb, and e're you suck
Fresh venom in, measure this happy earth,
Then to the Fens, Caves, Forests, Deserts, Seas,
Fly, and resume your native qualities.

Are not these fine companions, trim playfellowes for the Deities? yet these
and their fellows have made up all our conversation for some thousands of
years. Do not you fair Ladies acknowledge your selves deeply engaged now to
those Poets your servants, that in the height of commendation have raised your
beauties to a parallel with such exact prpportions, or at least ranked you in
their spruce society. Has not the consideration of these Inhabitants rather
frighted your thoughts utterly from the contemplation of the place? but now
that those heavenly Mansions are to be void, you that shall hereafter be found
unlodged will become inexcusable; especially since Virtue alone shall be
sufficient title, fine, and rent: yet if there be a Lady not competently
stocked that way, she shall not on the instant utterly despair, if she carry
a sufficient pawn of handsomeness; for however the letter of the Law runs,
Jupiter notwithstanding his Age and present austerity, will never refuse to
stamp beauty, and make it current with his own Impression; but to such as are
destitute of both, I can afford but small encouragement. Proceed Cozen Mercury,
what follows


Look up, and mark where the bright Zodiac
Hangs like a Belt about the breast of heaven;
On the right shoulder, like a flaming Jewel,
His shell, with nine rich Topazes adorned,
Lord of this Tropique, sits the skalding Crab:
He, when the Sun gallops in full careere
His annual race; his ghastly claws uprear'd,
Frights at the confines of the torrid Zone,
The fiery teame, and proudly stops their course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce Steeds learn
His backward paces, and so retrograde
Post downe-hill to the opposed Capricorn.
Thus I depose him from his laughty Throne;
Drop from the Sky, into the briny flood,
There teach thy motion to the ebbing Sea,
But let those fires that beautified thy shell
Take humane shapes, and the disorder show
Of thy regressive paces here below.

This Crab, I confess, did ill become the heavens; but there is another that
more infests the Earth, and makes such a solstice in the politer Arts and
Sciences, as they have not been observed for many Ages to have made any
sensible advance: could you but lead the learned squadrous with a masculine
resolution past this point of retrogradation, it were a benefit to mankind
worthy the power of a god, and to be paid with Altars; but that not being the
work of this night, you may pursue your purposes: what now succeeds


Vice, that unbodied, in the Appetite
Erects his Throne, has yet, in bestiall shapes,
Branded, by Nature, with the Character
And distinct stamp of some peculiar Ill,
Mounted the Sky, and fixed his Trophies there:
As fawning flattery in the little Dog;
In The bigger, churlish Murmur; Cowardice
In The timorous Hare: Ambition in the Eagle;
Rapine and Avarice in the adventrous Ship
That sailed to Colchos for the golden fleece;
Drunken distemper in the Goblet flows;
In The Dart and Scorpion, biting Calumny;
In Hercules and the Lion, furious rage;
Vain Ostentation in Cassiope:
All these I to eternal exile doom,
But to this place their emblem'd Vices summon,
Clad in those proper Figures, by which best
Their incorporeall nature is expressed.

From henceforth it shall be no more said in the Proverb, when you would
express a riotous Assembly, That hell, but heaven is broke loose: this was an
arrant Goale-delivery, all the prisons of your great Cities could not have
vomitted more corrupt marter: but Cozen Cylleneus, in my judgment it is not
safe that these infectious persons should wander here to the hazard of this
Island, they threatened less danger when they were nayl'd to the Firmament: I
should conceive it a very discreet course since they are provided of a tall
vessel of their own ready rigged, to embarque them all together in that good
Ship called the Argo, and send them to the plantation in New England, which
has purged more virulent humors from the politic body, then Guacum and all
the West-Indian druggs have from the natural bodies of this kingdom: Can you
devise how to dispose them better


They cannot breath this pure and temperate Air
Where Virtue lives, but will with hasty flight,
Amongst fogs and vapors, seek unsound abodes.
Fly after them, from your usurped seats,
You foul remainders of that viperous brood:
Let not a Star of the luxurious race
With his loose blaze stain the skies crystal face.

Here is a total Eclipse of the eighth Sphere, which neither Booker,
Allestre, nor any of your Prognosticators, no nor their great Master Tico were
aware of; bur yet in my opinion there were some innocent, and some generous
Constellations, that might have been reserved for Noble uses: as the Skales
and Sword to adorn the statue of Justice, since she resides here on Earth
only in Picture and Effigy. The Eagle had been a fit present for the
Germans, in regard their Bird has mewed most of her feathers lately. The
Dolphin too had been most welcome to the French, and then had you but clapped
Perseus on his Pegasus, brandishing his Sword, the Dragon yawning on his back
under the horses feet, with Pytheus dart through his throat, there had been a
Divine St. George for this Nation: but since you have improvidently shuffled
them altogether, it now rests only that we provide an immediate succession,
and to that purpose I will instantly proclaim a free Election

O yes, O yes, O yes, By the Father of the gods, and the King of Men, Whereas
we having observed a very commendable practice taken into frequent use by the
Princes of these latter Ages, of perpetuating the memory of their famous
enterprises, sieges, battles, victories, in Picture, Sculpture, Tapistry,
Embroyderies, and other manifactures, wherewith they have embellished their
public Palaces, and taken into Our more distinct and serious consideration,
the particular Christmas hangings of the Guard-Chamber of this Court, wherein
the Navall Victory of 88. is to the eternal glory of this Nation exactly
delineated: and whereas We likewise out of a prophetical imitation of this so
laudable custom, did for many thousand years before, adorn and beautify the
eighth room of Our caelestiall Mansion, commonly called the Star Chamber,
with the military adventures, stratagems, archievements, feats and defeats,
performed in Our Own person, whilst yet Our Standard was erected, and We a
Combattant in the Amorous Warfare. It has notwithstanding, after mature
deliberation, and long debate, held first in our own inscrutable bosom, and
afterward communicated with Our Privy Counsel, seemed meet to Our
Omnipotency, for causes to Our self best known, to unfurnish and dis-array
Our foresaid Star Chamber of all those Ancient Constellations which have for
so many Ages been sufficiently notorious, and to admit into their vacant
places, such Persons only as shall be qualified with exemplar Virtue and
eminent Desert, there to shine in indelible Characters of glory to all
Posterity. It is therefore Our divine will and pleasure, voluntarily, and out
of Our own free and proper motion, mere grace and special favor, by these
presents to specify and declare to all Our loving People, that it shall be
lawful for any Person whatsoever, that conceives him or her self to be
really endued with any Heroical Virtue or transcendent Merit, worthy so high a
calling and dignity, to bring their several pleas and pretenses before Our
Right trusty and Welbeloved Cozen, and Counselor, Don Mercury, and god Momus,
etc. Our peculiar Delegates for that affair, upon whom We have transferred an
absolute power to conclude, and determine without Appeal or Revelation,
accordingly as to their wisdoms it shall in such cases appear behoovefull and
expedient. Given at Our Palace in Olympus the first day of the first month, in
the first year of the Reformation


Who Is this appears?


This is subterraucan Fiend, Plutus, in this Dialect termed Riches, or the god
of gold; a Poison, hid by Providence in the bottom of Seas, and Navill of the
Earth, from man's discovery, where if the seeds begun to sprout above-ground,
the excrescence was carefully guarded by Dragons, yet at last by humane
curiosity brought to light, to their own destruction; this being the true
Pandora's box, whence issued all those mischiefs that now fill the Universe


That I prevent the message of the gods
Thus with my haste, and not attend their summons,
Which ought in Justice call me to the place
I now require of Right, is not alone
To show the just precedence that I hold
Before all earthly, next the immortal Powers;
But to exclude the hope of partial Grace
In all Pretenders, who, since I descend
To equal trial, must by my example,
Waving your favor, claim by sole Desert.
If Virtue must inherit, she is my slave;
I lead her captive in a golden chain,
About the world: She takes her Form and Being
From my creation; and those barren seeds
That drop from Heaven, if I not cherish them
With my distilling dewes, and fotive heat,
They know no vegetation; but exposed
To blasting winds of freezing Poverty,
Or not shoot forth at all, or budding, wither:
Should I proclaim the daily sacrifice
Brought to my Temples by the toyling rout,
Not of the fat and gore of abject Beasts,
But human sweat, and blood powered on my Altars,
I might provoke the envy of the gods.
Turn but your eyes and mark the busy world,
Climbing steep Mountains for the sparkling stone,
Piereing the Center for the shining Ore,
And the Oceans bosom to rake pearly sands,
Crossing the torrid and the frozen Zones,
'Midst Rocks and swallowing Gulfes, for gainful trade,
And though opposing swords, fire, murdring Canon,
Skaling the walled Town for precious spoils:
Plant in the passage to your heavenly seats,
These horrid dangers, and then see who dares
Advance his desperate foot; yet am I sought,
And often in vain, through these, and greater hazards;
I could discover how your Deities
Are for my sake slighted, despised, abused,
Your Temples, Shrines, Altars, and Images
Vncover'd, rifled, robbed, and disarray'd
By sacrilegious hands: yet is this treasure
To the golden Mountain, where I sit adored
With superstitious solemn rights convay'd,
And becomes sacred there, the sordid wretch
Not daring touch the consecrated Ore,
Or with profane hands lessen the bright heap;
But this might draw your anger down on mortals
For rendering me the homage due to you:
Yet what is said may well express my power
Too great for Earth, and only fit for Heaven.
Now, for you pastime, view the naked root,
Which in the dirty earth, and base mould drowned,
Sends forth this precious Plant, and golden fruit.
You lusty Swains, that to your grazing flocks
Pipe amorous Roundelayes; you toyling Hinds,
That barbe the fields, and to your merry Teames
Whistle your passions; and you mining Moles,
That in the bowels of your mother-Earth
Dwell the eternal burden of her womb,
Cease from your labors, when Wealth bids you play,
Sing, dance, and keep a cheerful holyday.

Plutus, the gods know and confess your power
Which feeble Virtue seldom can resist;
Stronger then Towers of brass, or Chastity;
Jove knew you when he courted Danae,
And Cupid wears you on that Arrows head
That still prevails. But the gods keep their Thrones
To enstall Virtue, not her Enemies.
They dread thy force, which even themselves have felt,
Witness Mount-Ida, where the Martial Maid,
And frowning Juno, did to mortal eyes
Naked, for gold, their sacred bodies show,
Therefore for ever be from heaven banished.
But since with toil from undiscovered Worlds
Thou aret brought hither, where thou first did breathe
The thirst of Empire, into Regal breasts,
And frightedst quiet Peace from her meek Throne,
Filling the World with tumult, blood, and war,
Follow the Camps of the contentious earth,
And be the Conqu'rers slave, but he that can
Or conquer thee, or give thee Virtues stamp,
Shall shine in heaven a pure immortal Lamp.

Nay stay, and take my benediction along with you. I could, being here a
Co-Iudge, like others in my place, now that you are condemned, either rail at
you, or break jests upon you, but I rather choose to loose a word of good
counsel, and entreat you to be more careful in your choice of company, for
you are always found either with Misers, that not use you at all; or with
fools, that know not how to use you well: be not hereafter so reserved and coy
to men of worth and parts, and so you shall gain such credit, as at the next
Sessions you may be heard with better success. But till you are thus reformed,
I pronounce this positive sentence, That wheresoever you shall choose to abide,
your society shall add no credit or reputation to the party, nor your
discontinuance, or total absence, be matter of disparagement to any man; and
whosoever shall hold a contrary estimation of you, shall be condemned to wear
perpetual Motley, unless he recant his opinion. Now you may void the Court


What Creature's this?


The Antipodes to the other, they move like two Buckets, or as two nails drive
out one another; if Riches depart, Poverty will enter


I nothing doubt (Great and Immortal Powers)
But that the place, your wisdom has denied
My foe, your Instice will confer on me;
Since that which renders him incapable,
Proves a strong plea for me. I could pretend,
Even in these rags, a larger Soverainty
Then gaudy Wealth in all his pomp can boast;
For mark how few they are that share the World;
The numerous Armies, and the swarming Ants
That fight and toil for them, are all my Subjects,
They take my wages, wear my Livery:
Invention too and Wit, are both my creatures,
And the whole race of Virtue is my Offspring;
As many mischiefs issue from my womb,
And those as mighty, as proceed from gold.
Often over his Throne I wave my awful Sceprer,
And in the bowels of his state command,
When' midst his heaps of coin, and hills of gold,
I pine, and starve the avaritious Fool.
But I decline those titles, and lay claim
To heaven, by right of Divine contemplation;
She is my Darling, I, in my soft lap,
Free from disturbing cares, bargains, accounts,
Leases, Rents, Stewards, and the fear of thieves,
That vex the rich, nurse her in calm repose,
And with her, all the Virtues speculative,
Which, but with me, find no secure retreat.
For entertainment of this hour, I Will call
A race of people to this place, that live
At Natures charge, and not importune heaven
To chain the winds up, or keep back the storms,
To stay the thunder, or forbid the hayle
To thresh the unreap'd ear; but to all weathers,
Both chilling frost, and skalding Sun, expose
Their equal face, Come forth, my swarthy train,
In this fair cireled dance, and as you move,
Mark, and foretell happy events of Love.

I cannot but wonder that your perpetual conversation with Poets and
Philosophers has furnished you with no more Logic, or that you should think
to impose upon us so gross an inference, as because Plutus and you are
contrary, therefore whatsoever is denied of the one, must be true of the other;
as if it should follow of necessity, because he is not Jupiter, you are. No, I
give you to know, I am better versed in cavils with the gods, then to swallow
such a fallacy, for though you two cannot be together in one place, yet there
are many places that may be without you both, and such is heaven, where neither
of you are likely to arrive: therefore let me advise you to marry your self to
Content, and beget sage Apothegms, and goodly moral Sentences in dispraise of
Riches, and contempt of the world


Thou do presume too much, poor needy wretch,
To claim a station in the Firmament,
Because thy humble Cottage, or thy Tub
Nurses some lazy or Pedantique virtue
In the cheap Sunshine, or by shady springs
With roots and pot-hearbs; where thy rigid hand,
Tearing those humane passions from the mind,
Upon whose stocks fair blooming virtues flourish,
Degradeth Nature, and benummeth sense,
And Gorgon-like, turns active men to stone.
We not require the dull society
Of your necessitated Temperance,
Or that unnatural stupidity
That knows nor joy nor sorrow; nor your forced
Falsely exalted passive Fortitude
Above the active: This low abject brood,
That fix their seats in mediocrity,
Become your servile minds; but we advance
Such virtues only as admit excess,
Brave bounteous Acts, Regal Magnificence,
All-seeing Prudence, Magnanimity
That knows no bound, and that Heroicke virtue
For which Antiquity has left no name,
But patterns only, such as Hercules,
Achilles, Theseus. Back, to thy loathed cell,
And when thou see the new enlightened Sphere,
Study to know but what those Worthies were.
Tiche, enters, hor head bald behind, and one great lock before, wings at her
shoulders, and in her hand a wheel, her apper parts naked, and the skirt of
her garment wrought all over with Crowns, Scepters, Boakes, and such other
things as express both her greatest and smallest gifts


See where Dame Fortune comes, you may know her by her wheel, and that veil
over eyes, with which she hopes like a seel'd Pigeon to mount above the Clouds,
and perch in the eighth Sphere: listen, she begins


I come not here (you gods) to plead the Right
By which Antiquity assigned my Deity,
Though no peculiarstation' among the Stars,
Yet general power to rule their influence,
Or boast the Title of Omnipotent,
Ascribed me then, by which I rivaled Jove,
Since you have cancelled all those old records;
But confident in my good cause and merit,
Claim a succession in the vacant Orb.
For since Astraa fled to heaven, I sit
Her Deputy on Earth, I hold her skales
And weigh men's Fates out, who have made me blind,
Because themselves want eyes to fee my causes,
Call me inconstant, cause my works surpass
The shallow fathom of their human reason;
Yet here, like blinded Justice, I dispense
With nay impartial hands, their constant lots,
And if desertlesse, impious men engrosse
My best rewards, the fault is yours, you gods,
That scant your graces to mortality,
And niggards of your good, scarce spare the world
One virtuous, for a thousand wicked men.
It is no error to confer dignity,
But to bestow it on a vicious man;
I gave the dignity, but you made the vice,
Make you men good, and I Will make good men happy
That Plutus is refused, dismaies me not,
He is my Drudge, and the external pomp,
In which he deckes the World, proceeds from me,
Not him; like Harmony, that not resides
In strings, or notes, but in the hand and voice.
The revolutions of Empires, States,
Scepters, and Crowns, are but my game and sport,
Which as they hang on the events of War,
So those depend upon my turning wheel.
You warlike Squadrons, who in battles joined,
Dispute the Right of Kings, which I decide,
Present the model of that martial frame,
By which, when Crowns are staked, I rule the game.

Madam, I should censure you, pro falso clamor^, for preferring a skandalous
cros-bill of recrimination against the gods, but your blindness shall excuse
you. Alas! what would it advantage you, if virtue were as universal as vice
is? it would only follow, that as the world now exclaimes upon you for
exalting the vicious, it would then rail as fast at you for depressing the
virtuous; so they would still keep their tune, though you changed their ditty


The mists, in which future events are wrapped,
That often succeed beside the purposes
Of him that works, his dull eyes not discerning
The first great cause, offered thy clouded shape
To his enquiring search; so in the dark
The groping world first found thy Deity,
And gave thee rule over contingencies,
Which, to the piercing eye of Providence,
Being fixed and certain, where past and to come,
Are always present, thou do disappeare,
Losest thy being, and art not all.
Be thou then only a deluding Phantome,
At best a blind guide, leading blinder fools;
Who, would they but survay their mutual wants,
And help each other, there were left no room
For thy vain aid. Wisdom, whose strong-built plots
Leave naught to hazard, mockes thy futile power.
Industrious labor drags thee by the locks.
Bound to his toyling Car, and not attending
Till thou dispense, reaches his own reward.
Only the lazy sluggard yawning lies
Before thy threshold, gaping for thy dole,
And lickes the easy hand that feeds his sloth.
The shallow, rash, and unadvised man
Makes thee his stale, disburdens all the follies
Of his mis-guided actions, on thy shoulders.
Vanish from hence, and seek those Idiots out
That thy fantastic godhead has allowed,
And rule that giddy superstitious crowd.
Hedone, Pleasure, a young woman with a smiling face, in a light lascivious
habit, adorned with silver and gold, her Temples crowned with a garland of
Roses, and over that a Rainbow eireling her head down to her shoulders


What wanton's this?


This is the sprightly Lady Hedone, a merry gamester, this people call her
Pleasure


The reasons (equal Judges) here alleag'd
By the dismissed Pretenders, all concur
To strengthen my just title to the Sphere.
Honor, or Wealth, or the contempt of both,
Have in themselves no simple real good,
But as they are the means to purchase Pleasure;
The paths that lead to my delicious Palace;
They for my sake, I for mine own am prized.
Beyond me nothing is, I am the Gole,
The journeyes end, to which the sweating world,
And wearied Nature travels. For this, the best
And wisest sect of all Philosophers,
Made me the seat of supreme happiness.
And though some, more anstere, upon my ruins,
Did to the prejudice of Nature, raise
Some petty low-built virtues, 'twas because
They wanted wings to reach my soaring pitch.
Had they been Prinees borne, themselves had proved
Of all mankind the most luxurious.
For those delights, which to their low condition
Were obvious, they with greedy appetite
Sucked and devoured: from offices of State,
From cares of family, children, wife, hopes, fears,
Retired, the churlish Cynicke in his Tub
Enjoyed those pleasures which his tongue defamed.
Nor am I ranked among the supersluous goods;
My necessary offices preserve
Each single man, and propogate the kind.
Then am I universal as the light,
Or common Air we breathe; and since I am
The general desire of all mankind,
Civil Felicity must reside in me.
Tell me what rate my choycest pleasures bear,
When for the short delight of a poor draught
Of cheap cold water, great Lysimachus
Rendered himself slave to the Scythians.
Should I the curious structure of my seats,
The art and beauty of my several objects,
Rehearse at large, your bounties would reserve
For every sense a proper constellation;
But I present their Persons to your eyes.
Come forth my subtle Organs of delight,
With changing figures please the curious eye,
And charm the ear with moving Harmony.

Bewitching Siren, gilded rottenness,
Thou have with cunning artifice displayed
The enameled outside, and the honied verge
Of the fair cup, where deadly poison lurkes.
Within, a thousand sorrows dance the round;
And like a shell, Pain circles thee without,
Grief is the shadow waiting on thy steps,
Which, as thy joyes' ginne toward their West decline,
Does to a Giants spreading form extend
Thy Dwarfish stature. Thou thy self art Pain,
Greedy, intense Desire, and the keen edge
Of thy fierce Appetite, often strangles thee,
And cuts thy slender thread; but still the terror
And apprehension of thy hasty end,
Mingles with Gall thy most refined sweets;
Yet thy Cyrcaean charms transform the world.
Captains, that have resisted war and death,
Nations, that over Fortune have triumphed,
Are by thy Magic made effeminate.
Empires, that knew no limits but the Poles,
Have in thy wanton lap melted away.
Thou were the Author of the first excess
That drew this reformation on the gods.
Can thou then dream, those Powers, that from heaven have
Banished the effect, will there enthrone the cause?
To thy voluptuous Den, fly Witch, from henee,
There dwell, for ever drowned in brutish sense.

I concur, and am grown so weary of these tedious pleadings, as I Will pack
up too and be gone: Besides, I see a crowd of other suitors pressing hither,
I Will stop' em, take their petitions and prefer 'em above; and as I came in
bluntly without knocking, and no body bid me welcome; so I Will depart as
abruptly without taking leave, and bid no body fare well


These, with forced reasons, and strained arguments,
Urge vain pretenses, whilst your Actions plead,
And with a silent importunity
Awake the drousie Justice of the gods
To Crown your deeds with immortality.
The growing Titles of your Ancestors,
These Nations glorious Acts, joined to the stock
Of your own Royal virtues, and the clear
Reflexe they take from th'imitation
Of your famed Court, make Honors story full,
And have to that secure fixed state advanced
Both you and them, to which the laboring world,
Wading through streams of blood, sweats to aspire.
Those ancient Worthies of these famous Isles,
That long have slept, in fresh and lively shapes
Shall straight appear, where you shall see your self
Circled with modern Heroes, who shall be
In Act, whatever elder times can boast,
Noble, or Great; as they in Prophecy
Were all but what you are. Then shall you see
The sacred hand of bright Eternity
Mould you to Stars, and six you in the Sphere.
To you, your Royal half, to them she will join
Such of this train, as with industrious steps
In the fair prints your virtuous feet have made,
Though with unequal paces, follow you.
This is decreed by Jove, which my return
Shall see performed; but first behold the rude
And old Abiders here, and in them view
The point from which your full perfections grew.
You naked, ancient wild Inhabitants,
That breathed this Air, and pressed this flowery Earth,
Come from those shades where dwells eternal night,
And see what wonders Time has brought to light.

RAise from these rockie cliffs, your heads,
Brave Sons, and see where Glory spreads
Her glittering wings, where Majesty
Crowned with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy, where Good and Fair,
United sit in Honors chair.
Call forth your aged Priests, and crystal streams,
Towarme their hearts, and waves in these bright beam.

1. From your consecrated woods,
Holy Druids. 2. Silver floods,
From your channels fringed with flowers,
3. Hither move; for sake your hours
1. Strewn with hallowed Oaken leaves,
Decked with flags and fedgie sheaves,
And behold a wonder. 3. Say,
What do your duller eyes survay?

We see at once in dead of night
A Sun appear, and yet a bright
Nooneday, springing from Starre-light.

Look up, and see the darkened Sphere
Deprived of light, her eyes shine there;

These are more sparkling then those were.

1. These shed a nob ler influence,
2. These by a pure intelligence
Of more transcendent Virtue move,
3. These first feel, then kindle love.
1.2. From the bosoms they inspire,
These receive a mutual fire;
1.2.3. And where their flames impure return,
These can quench as well as burn.

Here the fair victorious eyes.
Make Worth only Beauties prize,
Here the hand of Virtue ties
'Bout the heart loves amourous chain,
Captives triumph, Vassals reign,
And none live here but the slain.

These are the Hesperian bowers, whose fair trees bear
Rich golden fruit, and yet no Dragon near.

Then, from your impris'ning womb,
Which is the cradle and the tomb
Of British Worthies (fair sons) send
A troop of Heroes, that may lend
Their hands to case this laden grove,
And gather the ripe fruits of love.

1.2.3. Open thy stony entrails wide,
And break old Atlas, that the pride
Of three famed kingdoms may be spied.

Pace forth thou mighty British Hercules,
With thy choice band, for only thou, and these,
May revell here, in Loves Hesperides.

1. HEre are shapes formed fit for heaven,
2. These move gracefully and even,
3. Here the Air and paces meet
So just, as if the skillful feet
Had struck the Vials. 1.2.3. So the Ear
Might the tune full footing hear.

And had the Music silent been,
The eye a moving tune had seen.

These must in the unpeopled sky
Succeed, and govern Destiny,
Jove is temp'ring purer fire,
And will with brighter flames attire
These glorious lights. I must ascend
And help the Work.

1. We cannot lend
Heaven so much treasure. 2. Nor that pay,
But rendering what it takes away.
3. Why should they that here can move
So well, be ever-fix'd above?

Or be to one eternal posture tied,
That can into such various figures slide.

Jove shall not, to enrich the Sky,
Beggar the Earth, their Fame shall fly
From hence alone, and in the Sphere
Kindle new Stars, whilst they rest here.

1.2.3. How can the shaft stay in the quiver,
Yet hit the mark?

Did not the River
Eridanus, the grace acquire
In Heaven and Earth to flow,
Above in streams of golden fire,
In silver waves below?

1.2.3. But shall not we, now thou art gone
Who were our Nature, wither,
Or break that triple Union
Which thy soul held together?

In Concords purce immortal spring
I will my force renew,
And a more active Virtue bring
At my return. Adieu.

Whilst thus the darlings of the Gods
From Honors Temple, to the Shrine
Of Beauty, and these sweet abodes
Of Love, we guide, let thy Divine
Aspects (Bright Deity) with fair
And, Halcyon beams, becalme the Air.
We bring Prinoe Arthur, or the brave
St. George himself (great Queen) to you,
You Will soon discern him; and we have
A Guy, a Beavis, or some true
Round-Table Knight, as ever fought
For Lady, to each Beauty brought.
Plant in their Martial hands, Warr's seat,
Your peace full pledges of warm snow,
And, if a speaking touch, repeat
In Loves known langvage, tales of woe;
Say, in soft whispers of the Palm,
As Eyes shoot darts, so Lips shed Balm.
For though you seem like Captives, lid
In triumph by the Foe away,
Yet on the Conqu'rers nocke you tread,
And the fierce Victor proves your prey.
What heart is then secure from you,
That can, though vanquished, yet subdue?
BE fixed you rapid Orbs, that bear
The changing seasons of the year
On your swife wings, and see the old
Decrepit Sphere grown dark and cold;
Nor did Jove quench her fires, these bright
Flames, have ecclips d her fullen light:
This Royal Pair, for whom Fate will
Make Motion cease, and Time stand still;
Since Good is here so perfect, as no Worth
Is left for After-Ages to bring forth.

Mortality cannot with more
Religious zeal, the gods adore.

My Truths, from human eyes concealed,
Are naked to their sight revealed.

Nor do their Actions, from the guide
Of my exactest precepts slide.

And as their own pure Souls entwined,
So are their Subjects hearts combined.

So just, so gentle is their sway,
As it seems Empire to obey.

And their fair Fame, like incense hurled
On Altars, has pefum'd the world.

Wisdom.

Truth.

Pure Adoration.

Concord.

Rule.

Clear Reputation,

Crown this King, this Queen, this Nation.

Wisdom, Truth, etc.

Brave Spirits, whose adventrous feet
Have to the Mountains top aspired,
Where fair Desert, and Honor meet,
Here, from the toyling Press retired,
Secure from all disturbing Evil,
For ever in my Temple revell.
With wreathes of Stars circled about,
Guild all the spacious Firmament,
And smiling on the panting Routs
That labor in the steep ascent,
With your resistlesse influence guide
Of human change the incertaine tide

But oh you Royal Turtles, shed,
When you from Earth remove,
On the ripe fruits of your chaste bed,
Those sacred seeds of Love.

Which no Power can but yours dispense,
Since you the pattern bear from hence.

Then from your fruitful race shall flow
Endless Succession,
Scepters shall bud, and Laurels blow
'Bout their Immortal Throne.

Propitious Stars shall crown each birth,
Whilst you rule them, and they the Earth.


