HA! what divine shapes strike mine eyes, and make
My tongue to faulter, and my limbs to shake,
Through a respestfull awe and reverence,
Which thus so strongly seyseth on my sense?
These are no Fantasmes, such as we present,
But true Divinities from Heaven sent
To grace our Earthly Theater; then I,
Who cannot stand before such Majesty,
Fall on my knee, and in this posture pray
I may be heard to speak before the Play:
Madam, to you then, from whose beauteous sight
Those lesser Stars derive their borrowed light,
First I address me; and although I Am sent
From the proud Poet with a complement
To let you know that he protests and says
His Scenes will please, I cannot have that faith:
He swears that he prepares a Piece so rich
In high conceptions, that it will bewitch
Your eyes and ears, a Banquet that may please
The Danity Pallats of the Deities:
Unheard of vanity! I cannot choose
But undeceive you, know it is an abuse,
You Will meet with no feast here, since the chief dish
Which he presents, is neither flesh nor fish,
But a mere Fantasme, garnished like a coarse,
Larded, and served up with some love discourse,
Vnsolid matter flourishes of wit,
And airy fancies, in my judgment fit
But for the public Stage, not to appear
Within the verge of this illustrious Sphere,
Where nothing but the quintescence of wit
Should dare to enter: humbly I submit
To your transcendent judgment my advise,
And wish it may be found more rash then wise,
For daign to applaud the Play, and I Am content
To suffer for it any punishment,
to Appease the Poett, whose rage will be hot
Upon my head, if you protect me not:
Auspitious Planets, rule this night, and shed
Sweet influences on your board and bed.


ARt sure of it, Clarina? is it possible
That Isabella now is sensible
Of what I suffer for her, and resents
In my behalf the fire which her fair eyes
Have kindled in my heart?

Sir, I assure you,
It Is an undoubted truth, which I received
From her own mouth.

I Am much astonished
With a success so charming.

For my part,
I wonder that you are astonished at it:
Is it so great a miracle, I pray you,
To see a Maid to chaung? we have a mind
Alternatelie to turn love into hatred,
Or hatred into love, such an effect
As this so common in our Sex, should not
Seem strange unto you: Isabella. is
Of age sufficient to feel the effect
Both of the fire she kindles, and o'th'evill
Which she procures; the end, Sir, of her coldness
Should not surprise you: who gives love, can easily
Take it again; and when a young heart never
Has loved any thing, at the first fire
That sparkles, it is inflamed; my Mistress is
At sensible as fair you will be happy,
If you are faithful.

But come thou by her order?


To speak truly,
She willed me to speak as from my self;
But, Sir, your goodness is a gage that makes me
To tell you all, it is by her express order
That I have uttered this secret to you
Of such importance; but you must be silent
And discreet, if yov'll profit by the knowledge.

But may I not at least acquaint her brother
With my good fortune? he is bound by friendship
To favor me, and I should do him wrong
To disguise any thing to him.

Oh! Sir,
That Is it my Mistress, dreadeth, believe me,
Above all things: so far you must be from
Acquainting him therewith, that you should fear
Least he might have the least suspicion of it:
Know you not yet that her inhumane Father,
Will not permit her to give you her hand,
That to uphould the splendor of his house,
He Will raise his Son unto his Daughtets cost,
And, as it is often practiced now a days)
Tosh one designs his goods, and to the other
A Monastery?

I know well that her Father
Has fuch a purpose, but though he be of
A nature so inhumane, sure, her brother
Is not so barbarous: we are tied together
By such fair bonds of friendship, that I know
He Will mix his interests with mine.

If I
May frelie speak my thoughts here, I must tell you
That interest can break the strongest bonds,
That commonly men better keep their wealth
Then their fidelity, and that there is
No friend which they love equal with themselves
Be sure you trust no person now a days,
Danger still follows too much considence:
The less a good is known, the sweeter it is:
Lastly Sir, keep your secretts to your self,
My Mistress does desire it.

Oh! Clarina,
It is enough, there is no teason more
In this point to examine now, but I
Obey without dispute; the name of Friend
Must yield to that of Lover; but shall I
See our fair Mistress by thy means this evening?

Sir, it is very late.


I know thy skill.
And thou know --

Yes, your liberalities.
I Will go t'advertise her, as you desire,
And presently return, if you will stay,
Either to bring you up, or to persuade her
To come down to you. --

Oh how sweet it is
To mollisie a hard and cruel heart!
How charming is Love, when it is mutual?
what high content, what ecstasy of joy
Feels a poor captive in his troubles, when
The hand that tames him, helps to bear his chains?
A good gained easily is not esteemed:
The more it costs, the more it is precious:
Although the Horizon's covered with darkness,
I easily discern the door to open;
Doubtless, it is Isabella, I Will advaunce.

My happiness is greater then I dared
To fancy is, I cannot express unto you,
By what soe'r endeavor I can use,
The fullnss of my passion and my joy.

Dear friend, I do beseech thee let us leave
Vain complements, I know shy goodness for me.

Good God! how I Am confounded! it is her brother Fabritio. --


Thou know then, it seems,
How highly fortune is propitious to me,
My marsiage is concluded and agreed,
And thou come without doubt to wish me joy.

Friend --


I Am certain, it is this that brings thee hither:
Thou will congratulate my happiness.

How ready, and ingenious he is
To draw me out of trouble? --

Thou comes to take part in my ravishment.


Thou should do me a great wrong, to judge otherwise.


Know then that our desires did jump together:
I was a going hastily unto thee
To tell thee the glad ne Was, I did believe
Thou knew'st it not, and did not think to be
Prevented, I am highly redevable
To thy rare friendship.

I do nothing for thee
That is considerable, my interest
Alone brings me hither, and thou need'st not
To thank me for it.

How! what interest
Can thou have in this place?

The same which friendship
Enjoyneth me to take in thy contents.
Between two faithful friends, such as we are,
Every thing should be common, joy and happiness
Possesses both, when one of them enjoyes it.
Know when I bear a part in thy good fortune,
I more oblige my self then thee, and am
So well paid for my care and tenderness,
That there needs no addition of thanks.

Know also of my part when Fortune does
Confer her favors on me, they are dubled
When Carlos shares therein, and would diminish
If he should not partake them; but who comes
So late forth of our house?

SIr, enter quickly;
My Mistress Isabella in her chamber
Expects you and will. --

How, what will she?


Misfortune! it is Fabritio, I must
Dissemble. --

Well, what will she, finish now.


Sir, she would speak with you,
To Express the joy whereto her love engages her
On the conclusion of your marriage.

I know her tenderness, and what I owe her;
Carlos and I will see her presently
To give her a good night.

IT is Fabritios voice this which I hear,
I cannot come forth in a fitter time.

I willingly wait on you, your desires
Are mine, you need not doubt them --

Let us enter.


How this success favors my flame! --


But who does stop me? Heaven! it is a Woman,
It seems she Would speak with me Carlos stay.

I wait you here.


How comes it she withdrawes
When I advaunce?

Withour doubt she has something
To speak to you in private.

In the hope
Wherein I am that I am he you seek,
Be not offended that I dare t'approach:
I Have courage and civilitie enough
T'esteeme me fortunare if I could serve you:
T'engage me, Madame, to the offer which
I make to use my utmost cares and pains
T'accomplish your desires, it is sufficient
That Heaven has given you the advantage to be
Of that fair Sex unto which all owe homadge:
If I may notwithstanding without giving you
The least offense be honored to know
Your name, you will increase my Zeal in giving me
So fair a satisfaction.

Take it then,
My dear Fabritio, and know Climene.

Climene, my fair Mistress, what occasion
Could bring thee here at such an hour as this?
Thou doublest my fear and perturbation;
The more thy voice assures me; the more
Uncertain am I: and so far am I
From coming forth of error, that I enter
Into new Labyrinths, and doubts, I was
More happy when I knew thee less; oh what
Design have thou, I cannot comprehend it?

Leave me to speak, then, I will tell it thee.
I will not say what joy and happy tapture
Seized me when I understood the news,
That by a joint accord our friends and parents
At last had yielded to our marriage;
My love, which thou should not forget, exemps me
To discourse this unto thee, and enjoynes me
To a relation much more important,
And much less pleasing,

How! what thing is there
In nature that can trouble our repose,
Since as our hearts, our parents are agreed?

It Is of a longer date then from to day
That Love uses to mingle with his sweets
Much bitterness, those whom he flattereth
At first, are soldome happy, his deceit
Is equal to his blindness, and like Fortune,
H'is constant only in inconstancy:
This is a truth, which thou shall but to sensibly
Conceive: one day which was the fatallest
Of all my life, wherein my father burdened
With age and sickness had the sorry honor
To be by the Duke of Ferrara vissitted:
This Prince knew me in this extremity,
And thought to see some charms upon my pale
And blubbered face, my ne eyes unluckily
Wept unto his, and from the sources of
My tears his flame took birth,

Oh Climene,
I fear --

That fear offends me; my heart wholly
Was thine, I gave it thee, and the Dukes passion
Stirred up in me nothing but my aversion:
Though I concealed this fire, thou have no cause
To complain at it, for before it was known,
I hoped to quench it, and I scarce should yet
Reveile it to thee, if thy interest
Obliged me not to speak: on the report
Which was spread of our marriage, the passion
Of the Duke was converted into rage;
He came unto me in his first transport,
Swear to me solemnly that my choice was
The sentence of thy death, that Love opposing
My punishment, he thought to do more in
Destroying what I loved; and to the end
He might with the more rigor punish me,
He would even to the bottom of thy heart
Go for to seek me: Lastly knowing well
That his desire is to assault my life
In threatening thine, conducted here by love,
And more by fear, I come to conjure thee
To Avoid his fury; fly hence, what soever
Care for me keeps thee back here, and to save
My life, preserve thine.

This discourse is cruel
As much as it appears sweet: should you
Advice me to absent me from your person?
Sure I should little know what it is to love,
To Obey you in this point: Come, come, say all,
Confess your love is changed, that my remains
Of hope must vanish, and that the Dukes flame
Has dazzled you, I see well that mine here
Is troublesome, that you abandon Love
To follow Fortune, and that poor Fabritio
With all his fetters pleases your fair eyes
Less then a crowned Captive: I condemn not
This signal rigor; you deprive me of
A happiness whereof I was not worthy,
And in receaving of a Scepter offered
Unto your beauties, you obtain much less
Then you deserve. Reign, nothing is dishonorable,
To gain a diademne; and as I love you
More then my self, I shall esteem my death
A fair design, if entering into
A tomb, I leave you in a throne,

Fabritio,
Can thou love me, and speak thus? reallie
Thou detract'st from my glory in this thought
That I can be unfaithful, bannish it,
It is thy enemy and mine; suspicion
Between us two should be a hideous monster;
Can thou be ignorant with any justice,
That I love less a scepter then Fabritio,
And find more joy in being captive with thee
To reign over thy heart, then ore the universe?

It is enough, Climene, my devout
And amourous soul, which ever must adore thee
Although thou should abuse it, would believe thee:
And though a lie carries a swarthy face,
In issumg from thy mouth it would have charms;
But how comes it to pass that when they sweetness
For my sake flies a crown, thou do ordain me
To depart, and to leave thee? how to leave thee.
And in a Rivalls power to! no, this remedy
Is worse then the disease. Suffer my presence,
Or suffer my despair, what matter is it
Whether the Duke, or absence kill Fabritio

When two inevitable dangers meet
To invade us at once, it is wisdom still
To think of the most pressing, here thy ruin
Is certain, being absent, thou can live;
Consider this, that to what punishment
Soer our love exposes thee, thou can not
Suffer but I must suffer too, nor dye,
But I must cease to live, for know absuredlie
My days shall finish with thy destiny;
When we are dead, the grave shall be a wittnes
Of our reunion? where I see thee not
No object pleases me; if thou art yet
Incredulous of words and protestations,
At least believe my tears.

Oh open not
Those precious sluices, keep that treasure in;
Increase not my affliction with thy grief:
Not all the blood which tunneth in my veins
Is worth the least drop of these liquid pearls,
The evils wherewith my life is thretened
Are too well paid with a single tear.

Oh leave those vain discourses, and depart.


Well, well, Climene, I must then obey.


I have as much cause here to be afflicted,
As satissied, I fear more thy departure
Then wish it, and I give my faith unto thee,
That thou should not depart, if I could keep thee
And expose but my self. Let Us separate;
But what! this fatal image robs me
Already of my strength, spare me, I pray thee,
In parting hence the danger here to dye
In bidding thee adieu. --

Climene flies me;
O lamentable destiny!

FRiend, comfort thee.


I am inconsolable,
And must die, Carlos, since I must absent me.

Thou shall be happier, if thou will hear me,
I have a means that thou shall not depart,
And yet, in safety too, shall see Climene,
Alone, and without trouble.

To abuse
Thy friend, is but an odd way, in my judgment,
T'assist him, it is to aggravate my evil,
And not to heal it: is there any art
To tender me invisible?

For once then
Believe that I will do for thee a thing
Which seems impossible, give me leave to speak
And in a moment thou shall lose thy grief,
And thy astonishment: Thou know well
That Italy has for a certain time
Been troubled with two factions, whose partakers
In every city name themselves a loud
The Guelps and Gibelins: on this occasion
My Father and Climenes against each other
Took an immortal hatred; through their credit
And their condition, each made himself
Head of a faction; the Duke receiving
Advertisement thereof, and apprehending.
The issue of this enmity, so strongly
Conceived, made them both to be arrested,
Not withont, reason, and confined them
As prisoners, each one to his own house.
My Father who saw his pretension vain,
Knowing his house was near unto the others,
Had recourse unto cunning, and believed
That every thing was lawful to destroy
The greatest of his enemies; to work then
His ruin, and in private too, he caused
A close Mine to be dug even underneath
His adversaries garden; being finished,
My Father fell sick, and soon after dyed;
I was, as thou know by the right of birth
Heir of his goods, and not of his revenge;
But though I should now have a hatred for
Climene, I should sacrifice it wholly
Unto thy love; in opening this Mine,
Thou may, without being seen, have easy access
Unto thy Mistress, and to execute it
Securely, we will make all men believe
That thou art gone.

How infinitlie am I
Indebted to thee? how shall I acquit me?

My friendship is offended very much
At these expressions of acknowledgments.
I Will to the Duke expressie t'understand
What his intentions are concerning thee.
Enter into my house. --

I Will go t'impart
This secret to Climene. But what hear I?

Do that which I commanded.


It Is the Duke.
Rage overcomes my reason.

What aversenes
Soe'r Climene has unto my flame
Some little hope yet flattereth my soul,
I Have gained her woman; who has promised
This night to bring me ptivatelie into
Her chamber, the door opens, Iacinta!

Yes every thing succeeds to your wish,
My Mistress is deceived and takes you for
Fabritie, she commanded me to open
Without delay, her order does excuse me
In letting you to enter, lose no time;
But I hear her descend, speak not a word,
Without doubt, she will mistake her self.

We will
Be cleared therein, let us approach a little.

WHar would thou, my dear Lover?


Ha, dear Lover!
Heavens! what is this I hear!

I have cause, reallie,
To complain of thee, could thou not one night
At my request refrain my company?
Yet I excuse thee upon this presumption
That who loves well is little Master of
Himself, and cannot deny but my charmed soul
Complains here but of being too much loved.

May I believe this? Heaven! am I enchanted?


Thou need'st not doubt this truth; when I would be
Angry against thee, suddenly I check
My self, and when my mouth accuses thee,
My soul defends thee.

Fortunate Fabritio --


O happy Rival! --


Thou do know my love.


I knew it ill. --


What! answearest thou nothing?
Doubts thou my flame, or fearst thou that another
More pleasing object drives thee from my soul?
What ever happens, rest thy self assured
That my love and my life shall have one course,
And that it is impossible for me
No more to love thee.

How unhappie am I? --


How miserable am I? --


What obliges thee
To murmur still thus to thy self? must I
Confirm my love unto thee by some oaths?
If my flame for thee make not all my glory,
If thou alone possessest not my heart,
And all my thoughts, let --

Swear not ingrate full and perfidious Woman,
It needeth' not, I do believe thy words.

Thy death shall soon follow thy insolence:
My Guards.

It is in vain to make resistance.


Pursue, and kill him.


Alas! I Am dead with fear.


I faint, I faint, Iacinta, hold me up.


Let him dye, it is but just, too great a merit
Is often a great crime, in ruining
This Rival, I may gain what I desire;
And if he perish not, my hope must perish:
Let Us see if the success answeareth my wish.

OH, Sir, it is done, he is dead, in vain he did
Endeavor to defend himself, he fell
Pierced with a thousand mortal strokes, his soul
Found overtures enough to sallie forth
His bloody body, covered o'r with wounds

Oh! stay Sir. --


Thy cares are superfluous.
I am revenged, laciuta, and Fabritio
Is dead.

Oh if you love Climene, enter not
Into the house, she is scarce recovered yet
Of a great faintnes which seif d'on her spirits.

The blood which I have shed, will cost her tears,
I will not go, to add unto her griefs,
But retire me, a while, in the mean time,
Valerio, let it be your charge to go
Unto Fabritios Father, to acquaint him
With his sons death, and further let him know
That for his rash and saucy insolence,
He has received but a just recompense.

WHo enters there?


Madame, it is Valerio,
Who from the Duke Discourses with your Father

What pressing business might bring him here?


To tell you, I should be a Prophetess.


A message at this hower's not ordinary.

It does appear as strange to me, as you.


Let us expect the issue on it, and change
Discourse,

You feign would have me speak of Carlos;
Madame, confess it.

I cannot deny
But I am pleased, when I hear him praised.

I should not be in my right sense if I
Should speak ill of him, he is a brave man,
And of a Liberal and obliging nature,
He merits much.

But in what manner did he enrertaine
The intelligence thou gav'st him that my h^^ our
Toward him was inclined to more sweetness,
And that my heart at last disp of d it self.
To love him?

With transports, and ecstasies,
Which cannot be expressed.

Have thou been careful
To tell him cunningly, according to
Those rules I gave thee, that to do him service
Thou did betray thy Mistress, and gav'st him
That notice without my consent?

Yes, Madame
I told him so, and very handsomely;
But your strange love surpriseth me, you fear
that he should know it, and yet tell it him:
If he less knew it, would you be more pleased?
What humourous fancies are in Lovers spirits?

Though I love Carlos, (be it reason, or
Fancy that guides me) I believe I do
My self wrong, when I do justice to him;
The hashfulnes which Heaven has put into
Our Sex, for bids us to be free in what
Concerns the point of love; nor must we think
any thing lawful in relation to it:
And by that power, which I know not my self,
I cannot without blushing say, I love:
It seems that our eyes made to tame hearts,
When those that were our captives do become
Our conquerours, although they find the dart
Lovely and charming that subjected us,
Cannot without some shame, behold this change
The art to despise love, my heart no longer
Can practice, but o Heaven! whom see I Carlos?
So late here in my chamber.

PArdon me
This bold intrusion, seeing the door open,
I could not but lay hold of the occasion;
And following my love, I thought I might
With out offending you with disrespect
Enter, to cast my self at your fair feet.

How fancy you that I can be so little
Respectfull of my honor, as to suffer
A vissit from you without being offended?
No, Sir, your hope deceives you, and this liberty
You take, denotes in you little love,
Or too much Vanity: can I believe
You love me well, in giving to your self
A license thus to make foul-mouthed detraction
Inveigh against me, or can you imagine,
Without great folly in your self, that I
Can approve this design so little modest,
And not b'offended at it?

Though I can
Produce some reason here for my defense,
I hold me criminal, since I offend you,
And should but little profit to persist
In the opinion of my innocence
When your fair mouth condemns me,

I condemn you,
It Is very true, and for your punishment
I bannish you; you must go forth.

I dare not
Appeal upon your sentence, but retire;
I obey with regreet, but without murmur.

How Sir, begone so soon, what motives pray you,
Induce you thereunto?

Since you ordain it
I must depart, it is fit that I obey you.

I should think, Carlos, that you obey here
Some what too quickly for a perfect Lover:
Believing that you loved me, I appeared
Too proud, and scornful: it is an asstir'd maxim.
That one loves coldly what he quitteth easily;
Love is but il expressed by respects;
Who readily obeyes, knows not to love

I am astonished at this discourse;
Can you Complain, I quit you, Isabella,
When I obey you against my sentiment
When my love glittereth in my submission,
And when by a kind heat, which is not common,
My happiness displeases me, when it
Offends you? What would you then have said,
If seeking only my own sarisfaction,
I had preferred my desires and wishes
Before yours? in what manner can? I please you,
If in obeying you, I anger you.

You argue too well for a (...) love.
Where love is strong, reason (...) impotent;
The one cannot be established, (...) the other
Subsists; sometimes a maid would be resisted,
And obstinately loved against her consent;
And as her close desires are very seldom
Expressed, she often speaks with intent
To meet a contradiction, and to be
Enforced unto that which she desires:
According to this maxim, possibly,
I have on this occasion discoursed
Conrrarie to my sentiment, and perhaps,
I should be so far from believing me
Injured thereby, that you would have obliged me,
In not obeying me.

I Am raped in pleasant wonder, if those words
Astonish me, they charm me more; if I
Must stay to please you, nothing is more easy,
Then to content you fully in that point:
Seeing obedience is not pleasing to you;
I will stay, Madame, and will not obey.

It is too late; begone, my mind is changed;
Occasion is lost as soon as' passed;
You would have too much pride, and I should have
Too little, if after such a confession
I should detain you here.

This order is
Severe and rigourous.

But it is just:
I love not always to be disobeyed.
Follow Clarina, go, and have a care
You be not seen. O Heaven! I hear my Father.

Alas! we are undone; perhaps, he doubted
Of your intelligence, enter forthwith
Into this closet.

Oh Daughter, daughter!


He appears furious. --
I read my sad misfortune in his eyes.

Can I live after such high injuries?


What is the Matter, Sir?


How! demandest thou?
Do thou not plainly see in the excess
Of my quick griefs, that I am burthered with
The greatest of misfortunes?

What miffortune.
Oh! Father?

Isabella, Isabella,
I must no more be called by that name.

I feigned in vain, it is best to confess all.


O fatal chang. Heaven, who could'er have thought it?


Sir, I beseech you, hear me


What would thou
That I should hear, I know now but to well
What that love costeth me which takes pleasure
In blood and tears, and hides deadly poisons,
When it shows flowers.

I confess --


Oh how often.
Our expectations are deceived, in'wishing
Children, we wish troubles, and punishments.

If his death


Yes, his death is certain,


Suffer
That by my tears --

Thou sheddest them in vain.


Father, revenge is easy.


But alas?
What should I enterprise against the Duke?

The Duke? What say you?


Art thou ignorant,
That my son by his order received death?

I know it not; oh miserable destiny?


Valerio from him brought me the sad news,
And would enforce me to agree with him,
That he in killing him did not unjustly:

What cruelty is this? wast not enough,
Through an unjust and barbarous constraint,
To forbid you a just revenge, but even
To complain of the injury?

True, Daughter;
To punish yet my son after his death,
They will I understand it, and not murmur:
It seems they have a mind, that I should go
To kiss the hand that murthets me, as being
Stained, and smoking yet writh my sons blood.

But Sir, consider in this sad conjuncture,
That my dear Brothers body does expect
Interment.

Yes, I have took care for that,
By order from me it is to be brought
To this apart ement.

THe death, Sir, of your son is but to certain
W'ave brought his body into the next chamber.
Some little distance from this place we found it
Stripped, and so much disfigured with wounds,
That we should not have judged it to be his,
If seeking carefully we had not found
His coat not far of, and a little further
His heart: The thing which troubles me most
In this misfortune is, that having made
A fruitles search all over for the rest
Of his habillements, I could not find
Any one of them, and can not imagine
Who should have taken them thence.

Unhappy Son
Of an unfortunate Father!

Sir, you may
From hence see this sad object, if you please
To cause that curtain to be drawn aside.

Draw it, Licastes, let me see my sorrow;
We would be private, every one retire.
I cannot in this Lamentable object
Discern one seature of my Son, and scarce
Will my confusion give me leave to know
Him whom I have begotten, lying thus
In such a mangled condition.
Son, if it may be lawful in the sad
Estate wherein our miseries have put us
For me to use that name sometime so sweet,
I must then say unto thee, that this spectacle
Makes me to feel thy wounds more sensibly
Then thou thy self did when thou did receive them:
Thy miserable destiny and mine
Differs not much, the blood which thou shed'st is
The purest in my veins, the arm whose rigor
Hasted thy death, gave not the fatal stroke
Through thy heart, but it entered in my bowels:
And if we differ any thing in such
A miserable fortune, it is in this,
That I still feel the pressing evils, which thou
Suffer no more. Sources of my afflictions,
Deep wounds, which appear now but bloody mouths,
Whose silent accents seem here to folissit
My arm to a reveng, know that a subject
Houlds not his Sovereigns fate between his hands:
In vain ye ask reveng' against such a blood;
Alas here I can offer you no other,
But what my heart makes to flow from mine eyes.

The cruelty of the Duke, Sir, should be punished.


He is my Prince, although in my concernement
A tyrant, subjects destinies depend
Upon their Sovereigns, a crime becomes
Just in their hands; and if at any time
Those earthly Gods ought to be punished',
It must be by a thunder bolt from Heaven:
In this case I should make but vain attempts.
If the Duke dye, shall my Son live again?
But what chance brings Clarina here in such
Distracted haste?

Oh Signeur, oh Madame! --


What ails thee, art thou mad?


Oh, I have seen --


What have thou seen that troubles thee so much?


I have seen, I have seen --


What have thou seen?
Speak, I conjure thee.

Since then I must speak it,
I Have seen a dead man walk.

Thou Have lost thy reason.


Nothing's more true, that fearful Fantasme follows
My steps, I hear him, he pursues me; save me.

It is my Brother --


Straung! It is my Son.


Son, is my soul sure, or am I deceived,
Is this but an illusion which I see
But a vain object formed by my fancy?
If so, finish my life here with my error?
May thou yet be in the number of the living?
Fabritio, is it thy body that I see
Or is it thy shadow? come thou to fill me
With joy, or with affright? come satisfy me.
Let me embrace thee.

I see the light, Sir, and I find here charms,
Since you esteem my life at such a rate
As to lament it lost; not but as injured
By love and fortune, they should not do to me
A favor to deprive me of the light;
But though they should oblige me very much,
In the condition wherein my soul
Is now, to quench my feirce flame with my blood,
And though my blood thus shed would make my fortune,
More sweet, I would conserve it, since it is yours.

How comes it that thou have so strong a hatred
For life? thou can not doubt Climenes love;
The passion of the Duke alarumes thee
Too much; if thou love much, thou art no less
Beloved.

A fair appearance oftentimes
Bears false wittnes, I assured my self
Too much of her sidelitie, and though
I could doubt the report my senses made me,
I have too sure a testimony of her
Perfidiousnes, since her own mouth confirmed it:
She entertained in amourous discourse
My happy Rival with so passionate
An air, that I forgate both my respect
Unto the Duke, and the care of my life,
In uttering my despite; the Duke possessed.
Strongly with love and hate, gave express order
Unto his Guards to kill me; but I knowing
That my defense then was unprofitable,
Under a dark porch sought my sanctuary,
Whilst an unfortunate stranger walking that way
They took to apprehend me in the dark,
Was suddenly environed with the Guards,
And peirced through with halbards, as soon as
Those murderers were gone, to draw my life
Out of such hazards, and to make this error
More probable, I took the bloody clothes
Of that deplorable body, and was ready
To leave it mine, having cast his into
The current of the river, when a noise
Of voices crossing my design, I was
Constrained to leave that body naked and
Without life, to come speedily to you,
And to advertise you of this event.

I fear the issue of this blessed succsse;
Know that the Duke boasts of thy death already,
He thinks it just, which makes me to judge
That thy preserved life is still in danger;
If thou desire to obey thy Father,
Stay not a minute here, but seek thy safety
In sudden absence,

But What! must I leave
Climene?

She has left thee, her example
Shows thee the way to infidelity;
If to betray a person that does love us
Be a base act, to love one that betrays us.
Is no less weakness.

I am still a Lovet,
Though an abused Lover, and she has.
More beauty then injustice, her crime puts
No fearful object in her eyes and countenance,
Although she cease to love, she cease not
To be beloved, and my heart charmed by her,
Deceives it self, if it thinks to be able
To hate her, though she has betrayed it.

I find that absence is the only remedy
For this disease, it is fit thy passion yield
To my desires; fly through obedience,
Or through resentment, oh assure thy safety
By thy remove, it is that which Idesire.

And which I fear.


That matters not.


But Sir --


But I command it thee: for fear to be
Perceived, go forth without attendance and
Without noise unto Carlos house, and there
Pass the rest of the night; to morrow early
Before the day break, take the way to Florence,
Where I have many Friends that will defend thee.
In the mean time I Will send thee by a friend
A horse and money for thy journey; haste.

My Sister.


Add not to my misery
By sad regretts: be gone, be gone; adieu;
Let me embrace thee, I deprive my self
Of my most dear support, but though I lose thee,
It Is with intent to save thee. --

By what cruelty
Banish you my dear Brother?

Isabella,
Thou speak like a Sister, and I act
As Father, it is far more pleasing to me
To have an absent Son, then none at all:
I will deceive the Duke by taking of
His unjust pursuit against his life, when he
Shall fully understand his death: I will
To morrow that my house be all in mourning,
That this corpse be interred for my Son;
And to the end that all Ferrara be
Deceived with the Duke, I Will honor it
With funeral pomp, this is a debt we owe.
Unto a blood, whose loss has conserved ours,
Although we had no further use of it.
Lastly --

SIr --


What is it that troubles thee?


I met the Duke, Sir, at our door, he followed
A torch, which might, perhaps, discover me,
I hear noise, he pursues me, oh receive him,

O duty too unjust! cruel constraint!
Go quickly with thy Sister Isabella
Intothat closet.

He goes to Carlos house, what shall I do?


Come along with me, what should hinder you?

I fear you should be seen, and there fore would
That the light might be put out in this place.

I contradict not, les us enter then.


They are both entered, I must quickly forth:
Fortune no longer seems to be contrary
To my designs; the way is free; but what!
I hear the Fathers voice: oh how unhappie
Am I?

ALphonso, I am not deceived,
Your sone is Living, I have seen him: having
Understood, that Climene in a soowne
Fainted, being careful of so fair a life,
And guided by my love, I went unto
Her house, where happily I saw your son:
I know that she adores him, and dare say
That her disease will Vanish, if he Lives:
Lastly I wish it, and am come of purpose
To be informed cleerelie of this truth.

SIr, you may easily be cleerd herin;
Behold my son, judge if his loss be certain:
You feared him living, do not fear him dead.
See, his congealed blood fmoaks at your presen^^

It is too much, I Am fully satisfied
That he is dead; but what did Carlos here
Without light?

To secure my Friend, I must
Feign hand somlie --

He seems to be astonished.


Sir, it is not without cause that I am so.
For coming here to understand the news
of my dear Friend Fabritios destiny,
As Soon as I entered that open chamber,
His Ghost appeared before me in a posture
So dreadful, that I tremble to think on it:
He had the figure of a fearful Fantasme,
His bosom was opened with a large wound,
His color pale, and all his bod, bloody.
He came toward me with a staggering pace,
And darted forth a look though languishing
Yet feirce; a bleak, and black blood issued
Out of his mouth, and in his eyes grim death
Walked the round.

I also saw just now
Fabritios shape, but much less horrible,
Mc thought he was allve.

I dare engage
My credit, that your Highness saw his shadow
As Well as I.

It Is that which does confound me.
I still held for a fable what the vulgar
Report, of vain ghostes, and could not imagine
That a spirit once departed from a body,
Should leave the dead to come among the living,
Cease to be simple, and be visible,
Having no more a body. Notwithstanding
This success stattles me, I could not think it,
And now I cannot doubt it. But adieu,
I see your grief increases by my presence.

Sir, I wait on you.


I know what is a Farher, and that nature
Will not allow him to pay homadges
To him that lobbs him of a Son --

How highly --
Am I indebled to you for this favor? --

It is not great; twere requisire Fabritio
Should instantly betake him to my house,
From whence he may unseene make his escape,
I Will go unto the Duke now, to confirm him
Yet stronger in his error. --

Go, and choose
Florence to morrow for retraite.

Sir --


Let me
Receive no more replies, do what I bid thee,
All my desires should be strong laws to thee,
A diew, let me give thee the last embrace.

Sir, notwithstanding all your care, I fear
My brother cannot submit himself unto
This severe order; by his last discourse
I comprehended too well that he loves
Climene still after all her contempts,
And that his blinded soul is still resolved
To lose all, rather then to lose her sight.

I will be satisfied heerin, and know
The means to do it, fail not thou to morrow
Toward the evening to go to Climene:
The evil, that has surprised her, invites thee
Unto this Duty; for my part, I will
Make Carlos a vissit at that time:
If my son stays, I doubt not but to sinde him
In one or to there house; but it is late,
Adieu, in humane Fortune give unto thee
As much rest, as I have unquietnes,
And trouble at my heart. --

Las! mine does bleed
With double grief, though the first wound be hid,

THis is the Garden, Sir, where presently
My mistress comes to walk her melancholy:
The grief she takes for her Lovers loss.
And her decayed health distracts her judgment;
Although the danger of her malady
Be great, she walks, and would even fly herself.
Be you assured her griefs will suddenly
Conduct her here to weep her sad misfortunes,
And you may see her without witnesses,
And without trouble, if your Highness please
To fetch a turn or two in this close Alley.

Thy care augments my trouble, not my hope;
I burn, and fear to see her equally:
I burn to see her when I represent
Unto my amourous soul a charming Image
With all its beauties, and I fear to see her,
When my sad fancy represents unto me
The rigor of those fair offended eyes:
It Is an undoubted truth, I fear to see
That fair afflicted one to reproach me
The evils wherein my flame has plunged her,
To say that hatred is the only fruit
Of my addresses, and that with my Rival
My spirit is destroyed.

Your Highness, Sir
Should be prepared against the bloody taunts
Of a beblubbered Mistress: to speak truly,
And not to flatter you, I cannot see
The least hope that she will be wrought to love you
By this sweet way you take; I should advise you
Unto another course, make use of force,
Where kindness cannot work; ravish a good.
Which is denied to you; take her hence,
Who is so foolish and so rigourous,
And force her to be happy against her will.

How, take her hence by force? oh no, I cannot
Consent unto it, force can never be
Compatible with love, I would be loved
Without constraint, and cherished with out fear.
So far would her disdain be by this means
From ceasing, that it would take deeper root,
As having juster ground to propagate.

Your reasons are not altogeither lawful;
Our Sex, Sir, has strange maxims, oftentimes
It feels not what it does express, and seldom
Loves Deaths fatal wracks, after a fortune
Of such a nature, love in woman's heart
Turns unto grief, and that grief vanishes:
Her oaths and cries are of no consequence,
Her passion dies, when the object is no more.
Perhaps, Climene at this very hour,
Feels that ambition from loves ashes springs
Within her heart, and that she is prepared,
In spite of her just mourning to proferre
The glorious possessour of a throne
Before the sad in habitant of a tomb.
And, possibly, wearied with her affliction,
She would be forced to embrace your love.

To take her hence, and force her unto marriage,
Are the last means which I will try; before
I use toward her the least violence,
I Will see her.

Sir, she comes there.


How she studies,
And how her slow uncertain paces speak
The violent troubles of her spirit, her palenes
Depaints her grief.

Leave me alone, and pass
Into that alley.

Madame, --


Once again
I say I will be private for a minute;
Retire, and leave me to my self.

But if
The Duke. --

Be gone, and speak no more of him,
His name is odious to me.

How unfortunate
Am I?

I told you, sweetness would do nothing
Upon that stubborn spirit.

I will follow
Thy counsel, let us speedily go forth.
My presence would increase her cruelty.

For fear you should be seen, be pleased to stay
Till she goes in; till when I cannot hand sonelie
Draw you from hence; in the mean time your Highness
May in those shadie walks divert your sadness.

THou which they say can with facility
Act what inclndes impossibility,
Blind Guide, false Child which can have no pretense
At all unto the state of innocence,
Tyrant of hearts, Love, which have boasted still
That Death submitts unto thy power and will.
Make her to know that the muades thy right
In robbing my Fabritio of the light
And cause him to return again, or give
Me passeport the Shades where he does live.
The sweetest objects that now strike mine eyes,
Increase the number of my miseries,
The Suune tells me Fabritio's but a shade,
The Lillies at his loss look black and fade,
Those Rose, Queen of the flowers, seems to be
Stained with my Lovers blood, and neepes with me.
Dear Lover, thou sad object of my cries,
Whose image still dwells in my heart and eyes,
Reproach me not that I live yet to mourn,
After thy ashes sleep in their cold vrne,
Death without doubt are now had joined me
To thy sad shadovv, if I could agree
That thou should dye within my heart, oh no
I cannot leave th'y adored Image go.
Thy cruel Rival when he murdered thee
In his conceit, mistook, and murdered me:
His fury was deceived, not satis fied,
In cutting of thy days, Climene dyed,
The Duke betrayed his vows, for I expire
In thy cold ashes, Thou liv^st in my sire.

What Is that I say, Thou live in my fire,
Thy living Image is carved in my soul;
But those immortal characters, alas!
Which flatter me, are dead Fabritios.
Unjust and rigorous fate, was it reasonable,
That death should sease him so near marriage?
But why dispute I in such great misfortunes?
I Will suffer my sad sighs, forbid my tears,
And to enuenome my affliction,
I Will cease complaint, nourish my sorrow, and
By prudent cares for fear to weaken it,
I Will strengthen it within, I Will signalize
My griefs by silence better then by speech.
When one has lost all who complains, receaves
A kind of comfort, therefore I Will forbear;
Yes, my dear Lover, to deplore thy death
In stronger terms then plaints and exclamations
But what! I hear a fearful noise beneath me?
It seems that to join me to Fabritio
A sudden thunder does prepare itself
To come forth from the center of the earth:
The noise redoubleth, and renewed strokes
Makes me believe that underneath my feet
They dig graves, I perceive the flowers to fall
The plants to be unrooted, the most settled
And firmest oaks to tremble; it is time
To fly hence, but I cannot, fear forbids me;
Heaven! the disorder grows, and the earth cleaves
Fabritio comes forth thence, my strengh fails here,
And I am almost dead with fear and weakness.

THanks unto Carlos, and in spite of destiny,
I hope to see Climene in this garden
But to conceal the means on it I must cover
Most carefully the opening of the Mine:
Those stones, and those green boughs will make the hole
Invisible, I need but seek the ungrateful,
Before I vent my anger; I^le reproach her
With my passed services, with her inconstancy,
And her false oaths; for fear my death should give her,
Some satisfaction, and to the end t'afflict her,
I will appear unto her, and protest
That I will live yet to abhor her; yonder
I see that fair Inconstant; but alas!
I see her pale, cold, and in dying posture;
At this sad object which confounds me,
A tender pity does succeed my passion;
And if this pity caused by her misfortune,
Is not yet love, it is something, sure, that is near it,
Climene thou fair object of the flame
which rises up again, when almost dead,
Cast yet a languishing look upon Fabritio;
For all thy anger and inconstancy,
I never sought any reveng against thee;
Return, and if thou will not that I live,
At least with one sweet look honor my death:
I hear some coming, I must hide my self.
If I should go into the Mine again,
There Is danger I might be surprised.

I have heard strokes which troubled me much
The noise came from this side, let us advaunce
I see Climene, who fleepes; but alas,
Vnparalel'd misfortune! she is dead,
And underneath a thick veil, her fair eyes
Are shut up never to be opened:
Tyrannick destiny, by what law is it
That such a rare and exquisite beauty has
So tragical a fate, and that the Star
Of my nativitie, which has produced
My sires, sindes in its morn eternal night?
But I am in an errout; Master piece
Of all perfection, fate is innocent,
And I alone am guilty, it is this arm,
This batharous arm that has taken hence my Mistress
In murdering my Rival.

Oh, alas!


She breathes, she breaths, and opens her eyes
Love, be propitious to me.

Is it thee,
My dear Fabritio, Fantasme of my sonle,
Sweet Shadow of my Lover? what will thou?

Her grief distracts her judgment.


Come thou to reproach me suddenly,
That thou had lived, if thou had not seen me,
And that the fire sometime so fair, which kindled
Our hearts with mutual love, served but to light thee
To descend to the grave?

You are mistaken,
Adoreable Climene.

Tell me then
The cause that brings thee, Come thou to solissit
My heart and arm a while yet to defer
My death, unto the end to revenge thine!
Will thou that this hand plunged in the Dukes blood
Make my destruction just, and thine revenged
Speak speak; he shall not long be in condition
To triumph in thy death, in the midst of
His Court, and in the eyes of all Ferrara,
I Will pierce the bosom of that barbarous Prince.

My heart fears but the stroales of your fair eyes,
Know me, and recollect your wandering senses
The excess of your sorrow wrongs you much.

Whom do I see?


A Prince that loves you.


What fatal accident, what cruel destiny
Presents me, in stead of my Lover,
His murderer, Sir, you must pardon me
This langvage, as a person highly injured:
I can no mor respect you: is it possible,
You are not fully satisfied yet
In barbarously depriving me of him,
I loved more then my self, but you must come
To robb me of his Shadow?

This vain shadow
You speak of, is but an illusion
Formed by your fear and your affliction;
And when I Have dissipated from your fancy
This fatal image, you will find that I
Have more advauntaged, then injured you.
For dead Fabritio, please you to remember,
That it was your interest made me punish him;
The insolent discourse which he held forth,
Carried me justly to that violence:
If I had spared him, I had injured you,
And if I had done less, I had less loved.

Brahis account then I Am indebted to you
For giving, me the greatest of misfortunes,
In killing even before mine eyes the object
Which I adore, without whom the fair light
Is odious to me; you are much deceav'd
In your pretentions, you have gained nothing
In ruining a Rival, and the art
Whicch you use to asperse his reputation,
Cannot hinder him to live with in my soul:
Though this death which I feel livelie with in me
Had not expressed so much hate and contempt
As you show love and tenderness, I should
Have loved him so much as I hate you.

I condemn not your just transports, but bear them,
He was your Lover, though he was my Rival;
And I repent my rage in that I wronged
Your charming Image, printed in his soul:
I know that Rival, which was odious to me,
Pleased your fair eyes more then I, his merit
Was that which only rendered him guilty:
I hated him for being too amiable;
But in that hate, I fully did express
My love to you in offering you a heart,
And with that heart a crown. But I offend you,
Your looks speak your disdain. not to provoke you,
I leave you, and hope yet, that you will one day
Have less aversion for me.

Time can never
Cure my disease, death only is its term.

I will approach, I see the Duke retire,
My trouble is passed; and Climene lives;
But, heaven: who comes here again to cross me,

The Funeral is coming.


What, Fabritio's?


It is Iacinta, I need not for her
Keep a loofe of. --

Yes Madame, you may see
The coffin which encloseth your dead Lover
From your Balcony at this very instant:
His Father, who intends to celebrate
His mourning, honors Fabritios death
With funeral pomp, and whilst they carry him
Unto the Temple, you may, if you please,
See that unfortunate body pass.

I will so,
It is my last desire,

Enjoy it, Madame,
Behold here the unfortunate Fabritio.

Heaven! where shall I fly safely from this Fantasme.
I dare not stay. --

What! will Iacinta leave me?

I have no other Mistress now but fear.


False and ungrateful Beauty, do you fly me!
This makes your lightness. To appear too much:
If any justice yet reigns in your soul,
After you have betrayed me, give me leave
To complain my misfortune.

I betray you?
What do I hear, Heavens! how astonished am I
At this so strange event? if I may here
Believe mine eyes, it is the living portrait
Of my Fabritio, but if I believe
His voice, it is but a deceitful Fantasme
Of such a sa'tfull Lover:

I am that very Lover, who against
Your will could not, in losing all his hope,
Lose his life too ^ yes, I live yet, Ungrateful,
And fear I live for you still in despite
Of my just anger, I know not what power
Opposes it in steed of murmurring,
I sigh, and all the heat that rests with me
Resembles anger less then love.

Now I
Begin again to know Fabritio;
His heart in spite of him does secretly
Render me justice; and when the false mouth
Condemns me, it seems resolute in thought
That I am faithful.

Faithful? oh it is
Unto the Duke that this speech is addressed
He only is to hope for all your love.

Can thou impute those base thoughts unto me?


They are truths, if I may believe your oaths;
I should doubt yet of this extreem misfortune,
If I had understood it from the mouth
Of any other but your self.

An evil
When it is known, is easy to be cured;
I know thy error, cease to be abus^d;
If the last fatal evening I expressed
Find words unto the Duke, I did believe
That I discoursed to thee, and so upon
That faith all that I said to him, was wholly
Intended unto thee^, thy only Image,
Which can possess my heart, my memory,
And all my senses with so much renown,
Was only guilty in that fatal moment,
If but a little blindness may be said
To be a crime in Love.

Unto a Lover,
Whose soul resignes it self unto suspicions,
Any excuse is good enough, and passes,
A lie that pleases deceives pleasantly,
And every thing is easily believed,
Which is desired; though all thy reasons were
As false as fair, so sweet it would be to me
To see my scares to end, and in my fancy
To flatter the affliction which thou
Might cause me, that thou would oblige me strongly
To make (...) yield to be abused.

Let thy heart be
Free from those Low suspicions; if thou will
Absent thee, I am ready here to follow thee;
I Will manesest unto thee every where
The clecrenes of my faith, be it to live,
Or dye with thee, let Heaven bless, or deceive
Our expectations, I Will live satisfied,
Or dye content.

What owe I --


Thou ow'st nothing;
Nothing of thanks, in following thy desires,
I follow my own sentiments; but how
Were thou secured?

Fortune did favor me,
A stranger passing that night perished
Instead of me, and this Mine gives me means
From Carlos house to enter into thine.

Thou may a while here entertain thy thoughts
In the mean I Will go to fetch my lewells:
Pass underneath this arbor, I believe
I hear a noise; as soon as it is night,
I Will come to thee again.

IF I am not deceived, here comes Iacinta,
Climene trusts her with her nearest secrets:
Fortune, it seems, to day in overie point
Will be sweet to me, if I can oblige her
To go away with us.

Scarce freed yet
From my first fear, I tremblinglie return
Unto Climenes house: Fabritio
Was murdered through my means, and without doubt
He comes to revenge himself upon me
From the other world: my ruin were inevitable
If I should meet that fearful Ghost again.

Stay. --


It Is the Spirit, good God, I dye with fear!
Oh Genrle Fantasme, have compassion of me;
I do confess my fault, and promise faithfully
Never to betray you, nor my Mistress more.

Strange! but I must know more. Disguise me nothing,
If thou do --

Touch me not then, I beseech you,
And I will tell you all: it is true, I always
Endeavored to hurt you, that I studied
To serve the Duke in his amors against you,
And that indead I was cause of your death.

Pernstious spirit. --


Enter not into fury,
This is not all yet, lend your ear, I pray you,
I had forgot to tell you that the Duke.
By my advise this day has six'd upon
Climenes rape, and that this very evening
He will attempt this unjust enterprise,

Horrid persidiousnes!


I have told all my faults, now may it please you
That I leave you in peace: for know that nothing
Is so unpleasant to me as discourse
With people of another World. If you
Were not dead, you would be so good unto me,
To grant me pardon upon my repentance.

It would not suite well with a generous spirit
To punish a weak woman. Go. --

Monsieur Fantasme,
God will receive your soul. -- Exit Iacinta.

The Duke this night
Intends, it seems, to take away Climene,
Heaven, must my hope be yet again destroyed?
But my heart leaves it self to be assaulted
With a vain sear, seeing I am beloved,
What should I doubt; nothing is strong enough
To disunite two hearts which love has joined,
This God does miracles for those that be
His saithfull Votaries, and such are we.

Behold the hour, wherein I hope to see
The Beauty which my soul loves and adores:
The Snnne already having run his course,
Darteth no more here but a feeble light:
With his last rays he now adornes the West
He setts with glory, shines when he is lost
And the fair remnants of his dying brightness
Makes his fall and loss illustrious,
Pardon, thou glorious Stat, whose splendor hurts me,
If my hope comes, when thy light vanishes:
Ingenious Love, to hurt me more, assembles
That mass of Instre which so charmeth me
In fair Climenes eyes, and presently
Her looks will give me brightness which surpasses
That which thou take from me: But she stays,
Heaven. she neglects me, she appears not:
The Moon is well advaunc'd: and all my hope
Dies with the day; this long delay denotes
A'fault of love: I hear one walk, and if
My eyes are faithful witnesses, I see
This miracle of Fair ones come at last.

FAbritie --


Here, fair subject of my flame.
Here Is he, who is as saithfull as he is happle.

I did not think to have been so long absent.
I fear that I have put thee to some trouble.

Believe, indead, that to Fabritio
The least remove of thy fair eyes is grievous,
I did expect thee sooner, and to speak
The truth resolved to complain unto thee,
Upon this point; but to forget it quire,
It is sufficient that I see thee now;
I have no power to complain before thee,
The present pleasure flattering my thought,
Takes wholly from me the remembrance
Of my passed trouble.

Since love forces thee
Not to accuse me, the same passion
Obliges me too to excuse my self.
It was not the care of these Diamonds
Where with I Am laden, which caused my stay,
It only was the care to take a time
Proper for our departure.

Let Us refer
The prosecution of this discourse
Unto another time, and think we now
To finish our designs, and t'haste our slight;
I fear the strokes yet of injurious chance,
She should be trusted least, when she smiles most.

Let Us haste, I willingly consent unto it,
I fear least that torch should discover thee,
Oh hide thee!

I will dye rather then hide me;
An outrage is intended to thy person.
I must prevent it, being advertised
That the Dukes ready by a barbarous order
To carry thee away by violence.

SHe must be here


I Will draw a side a little,
But so, that I Will hear all: Go, speak from me.

What suffer thee to be taken hence by force,
And in my presence?

No, if any Violence
Be offered, step forth unto my aid,
In the mean time hide thee, and make me not
To fear for any but my self; Valerio,
What seek you here at such an hour as this?

I could not wish to meet a better object
Then your fair self, a coach near hand attends you,
I must conduct you there, having for it
An express order.

How! from whom have you
This order?

Madame, from the Duke my Master,
Whom every one is bound here to acknowledge
For Sovereign.

Let him be never so Sovereign,
Yet he must know that the free soul of Climene
Is not within his power my heart depends
Upon another, and say what he will,
That is no lawful subject to his Empire.

Madam, I Am sorry -- but I must obey,


What' thinks he to make himself beloved.
As one makes himself hated' Losing liberty?
Believes he that I should be so simple
To take so many marks of hatred for
Effects of love? what from his enmity
Might I not fear, if when he loves me,
He seeks to persecute me?

I am forced
As Much as you are, but it is in vain
For you to give your self o'r to complaints,
Follow me quickly where I go. --

Stay, stay;
Her beauty will not suffer any outrage
To be done to her person, in my presence,
Or rather I have too much passion
To suffer that she should be injured.
It Is true that troubled much, and desperate
At your contempt I was prepared to take you
Away by force, I did expect the issue,
And will confess, Madame, that in my soul
Love vanquished respect; but presently
At your first words love vanquished at its turn,
Yielded unto respect: cease, cease to fear,
Thou charming wonder, the heat of that love
Soome what too violent: should your heart be
Hard as a rock, I only would employ
Respect to touch it, there is more passion in me
Then hate in you: in all the places where
I reign, you shall be Souveraigne, and I shall
Esteem me happy, not to give you laws,
But to take them of you.

I should give thanks
Unto the Duke for such a declaration
If I could flatter here Fabritios enemy.

Although his loss has reason to oblige me,
Since it afflicts you, it afflicts me;
But there runs a report upon this point
Which terrifies me, it is that to your eyes
His Fantasme does appear.

There Is nothing false
In this report, Fabritio since his death
Appeared before mine eyes.

To dissipate
Obnoxious fears which might cause evil visions
Within your fancy, some of my attendance
Shall presently have order not to leave you,

Oh! Sir, this is not it which I demand.


It Is the least duty I must render you:
Suffer them for to guard you.

Sir, it needs not.


Your quietness concerns me, and I must
Take care of it.

So far you would be from obliging me
By this design, that you would hurt me rather;
Of this care therefore I dispense your Highness.

To condescend to your desires herein,
Were to betray you, the sad vision
Of a dead person does increase your griefs.
Permit --

No, Sir, command them not to follow;
The vision does please me, and I fear
To be deprived of its company.

This Spirit will always distract your reason,
As long as you stay in the house alone.

If but to chaung house will give you content,
I Will satisfy you, Carlos is my neighbor,
I will retire to him.

If you six there,
I contradict it not, his mother is
A very prudent Woman, and her counsels
Will be a great help to your timourous spirits,
Permit me to conduct you to her house.

This prayer is a command, Sir.
I cannot
Refuse to follow, him, especially
Seeing Fabritio likewise has design
To go there.

What discourse i'th'name of wonder
Might she have all this while there; but good God!
The Duke draws her away, I Will succor her.

This Fantasm's nothing elce but the effect
Of a sad thought, the senses are all hurt,
When the soul's troubled.

I Will put out the light.


Lastly l' promise you that there is no Fantasme,
Nor ever was; but what is that I see?
O prodegie! o Heaven! how am I troubled?

It is Fabritio, who is come to take
Climene from you.

O Fabritio,
Unto what danger comes thou to expose thee?

Climene, save thy self, or leave me perish.


My life's in danger, when thou hazardest
Thy self. I do withdraw now, follow me.

Advance, Guards, I Will be cleared in this point,
Leave me not, I command ye.

She is gone.
I Will follow her.

Sir doubt not on it, it is
Fabrotio's shadow.

No matter, I Will be satisfied therein.


I Will go to aid my friend, this noise does make me
To judge that his life runs some danger here.

It is impossible to take a Fantasme;
Yet he is taken, and it is a sensible,
And solid body.

Traitor, and the greatest
Of all my enemies.

Oh Sir! what fault
Has Carlos committed? never had you
A subject yet more faithful.

What is that?
It Is Carlos, strange! this is a new surprise:
Here all my arguments are vain. Come you,
Carlos, to take Climene from my hands?

I, Sir? by no means; the noise which I heard
Drew me unto this place to know the cause on it.

Who came into this garden then to stop me?


It was Vabritios shadow, can you doubt out?
We can give you a certain testimony
Thereof, as knowing well his voice and visage.

I observed them my self very distinctlie.


Assure ye, Sir, it was Fabritios shadow.


I Am stranglie troubled at this prodegie;
Climene was persuaded by my reasons
To quit this house, and I was bringing her
Unto thine, when that spirit came and parted us,
So that we have lost each other in the dark.

This success, Sir, strikes me with terror too.


Carlos, we must find out this charming Beauty,
And for her safety bring her home to thee:
Seek thou of than side, the rest follow.

Oh heaven! we are undone, the plotts discovered:
If the Duke find Fabritio, his ruin
Is certain, but if in spite of the night
I Am not abused, I see a woman coming
Toward me.

FAbritio, is it thee?


No.


Oh, my grief!


Although it be not he, at least it is
His second self, it is Carlos. --

Oh! dear Sir,
How misetable am I?

I know, Madame,
All your misfortune, having understood it.
From the Dukes mouth, who very much in passion,
Seeks you with no ordinary care.

Fabritio's here about, if he should be
Unfortunately sound, it were impossible
To save him afterward; Sir, if you love him,
Divert his danger, overtake the Duke;
To draw him hence, tell him that I am ready
To come forth of this fatal place, and that
I Have promised to stay here till you come,
To go with you unto your house.

I fly;
In the mean time, find, if you can your Lover,
And tell him what has happened, above all
fail not to be here presently, your self.

Fortune; I fear is not propitious
Enough unto me, to permit me now
To find Fabritio, with too much heat
Her anger does pursue me, to consent
That I shall have this happiness, notwithstanding
I hear a noise, perhaps Love favorable
To my chaste flames, guides my Lover here:
But what, they are two women; they have seen me,
Or I am much deceived, I must be gone
To seek Fabritio, and to shun their presence.

IT is my Mistress, Madame, approach bouldly,
And give me leave to go immediately
Into the house, my conduct, and my cares
Are here superfluous.

Stay, she goes away,
And I see her no more, come, let us follow.

Good God! if I should meet the spirit again
Which I fo dread?

Thou know all these turnings,
And thou can guide me; Go before.

Who, I? defend me, God, from such a rudenes,
I know my duty well, though a gross Girl,
Madame, you are to go first, I Am to wait you
Oh if the spirit should come to punish me
For my late treason! --

But thou tremblest.


Alas! there is reason for it.


Stav here then,
I Will follow her without thee, ho, Climene!

She leaves me alone, oh, I am lost!
Madame, where run you?

Do not stay my stepps.


Should you be never so angry, by your favor,
You shall not follow her.

Thy importunity
Is really, extreme, why do thou stop me?

Because I love you, you would be in danger,
Should you go on, your safetie's dear unto me,
And I Will take care on it.

Leave me.


No, I must not:
I Will tell you a strange thing a fearful Spirit
Haunteth those places,

Is It a waggish Spirit?
Hobgoblin, or a Robin, Good follow?

No, he is not pleasant, rather on the contrary,
It is an evil, and a mischievous spirit.

Who told it thee?


Mine eyes, which did not lie.
And Is wear to you that I Have twenty times
Seen it in several figures, sometimes like
A man, and sometimes like a ravenors beast,
And still at every bout mischievoullie
Ready to break my neck.

Climene then
Is not in safety here.

I know not that;
But I believe there is a league between them
They agree very well: But see the spirit
In form now of a Giant; Heaven protect me.

IT is Iacinta, and Climene is
Without. doubt with het.

It approaches to us,
Oh let us fly, it is death to meet with it.

It stopps at me, o Heaven, what fear have I?


Climene, stay, and hear me, I Am Fabritio.


It is my brother, strange surprise! I will
Speak soft and conterfeit my voice to find
What his design is, --

The injurious Duke,
From whom my cares would take thee, see keth thee
Without doubt at this instant, let us lose
No time to shun his violence, but haste we
To Carlos house: besides, I fear my sister,
For she at home this evening said unto me,
That she would come to vissit thee: if she
Should see me, presently my Father, who
Thinks me already far of from this place,
Will understand the contrary. This is not
To detract from my Sister, she is good.
And very innocent, but her fault is
She cannot hold her peace.

Continue, Brother,
I Am much obliged unto you, pray, proceed.

Misfortune! it is my Sister Isabella.


Pursue, good Brother.


Las! I Have said too much,
Excuse the fears and weakness of a Lover?
If thy heart felt such seisures thou should know
That the God, who is President of love,
Is but a timourous child, and trembles always:

I do confess, that I am ignorant
In maxims of this nature, and indead
Too innocent to understand them well:
Concerning your abode, which I have learned
With some regrett, for being known to me
It Is not less secret: I will make appear
By silence and discretion, that I am
A better Sister to you then you are a
Brother to me.

Oh! Sister, what sweet sentiments have you?
How shall I merit them?

I hear some body,
Brother, let us withdraw.

I Will take your counsel; go forth of this dwelling
To Carlos house, I Will follow you immediately.

YOu see Climene stays here, as I said,


Conduct her! it is enough, Im satisfied,
And will go forth content.

Madame, it is Carlos,
Follow me without fear, speak soft --

It Is Carlos,
I Will follow him without constraint. --

Guards, wait upon Climene for this night,
My eyes must be deprived of the happiness
To see her, my love urges me in vain
To follow her, defer we till to morron
To render her a vissit, the good which
I expect thence would be too dearly bought
If it should cost a trouble to Climene.
Depart we, and lets flatter us with hope
That we through perseverance shall o'rcome,
And that there is no heart so hard by charm,
Which those fires in my bosom cannot warm.

FAbritio.


My Climene.


Heaven! what hear I?
My judgment is confounded here; Climene
Is gone with Carlos, yet some secret charm
Which I cannot comprehend, houldeth her here
In conference with the shadow of the dead.

Every one is retired we are alone,
The Duke is also gone out of the garden:
Let Us finish the design we have in hand,
Let Us press it on, and fly we without fear
That Tyrants love, for whom I Have so much horror

In what a hideous gulf of black despair
Am I plunged by this prodegy? is it a truth,
Or is it a dream?

Haste we, but I Am afraid
That in the dark we shall not find the Mine.

No matter we caan go out of the garden
Another way, the key of the back door
Which I have here about me privately,
Will give us passage forth to Carlos house,
Where' against the light returns, I will be ready
To Embrace thy fortune, and to follow thee,
Go where thou will.

By what expressions. --


It Is enough, make me no reply, but follow,
We Iose time,

There Is no doubt of it, it is certain,
Fabritio either dead of living steal
Away Climene; ha! I cannot suffer,
This outrage in my sight: come, I Am resolved
To lose my self, or reskue her; O Heavens!

WHom see I here? misfot tune! oh unluckie
Encounter! but, perhaps, I am deceived,
Is it you, Isabella?

Strange? What hear I?
Is It possible that Carlos should not know me?
Are all my features suddenly defaced?
No, they remain yet, only I have cause
To think ahat they are razed out of thy memory

Oh, Madame, this suspicion is unjust,
I will upon this point tell you the truth
With all sinceritic.

Pray, What sincerity
Can one expect from you?

Condemn me not
Before you hear me: I had a design
Which prospered not, my intent was to bring
Another woman here, and I confess
That I am sorry now to see you Madame.
In her place, your fair presence is indead
A trouble at this time. But --

It suffices,
Ungrateful, thy crime is acknowledged,
And more sincerely then I could have thought

Suffer me to express my self.


It needs not,
What explication can be more clear?

Hear what remains.


No, I will hear no more,
All thy disguisements are superfluous.

But know --


What should I know more? have thou not
Told me that thy soul's fleeting, thou intende'st
To bring another Woman here, thou will
That I believe it, and I do believe it.

I have not. --


True, thou have not any thing
For me but coldness, and presumption;
To see me in her place, thou say, thou art sorry,
And with an unjust passion thy salfe spirit
Carried away, goes from inconstancy
To incivilitie.

Give me leave to speak.


What can thou say unto me?
That thou acknowledgest the Empire of
A Worthier object, that in vain thy heart
Has stood against her charms, and that to gain thee
I have too little beauty?

Oh deceive not
Your self with so much art, and I beseech you
Be less unjust to my poor heart that loves you.

In losing such a heart as thine, I shall
Lose little, it is faithles, base, and treacherous,
And I pretend not any thing unto it;
Adieu.

What without hearing me, oh stay,
I do beseech you, stay.

My presence here
Does trouble you.

It is a real truth.


A real truth,
Ungrateful?

You shall not go forth before
You Have heard me, suffer me upon this point
T'ex press my thought.

I should again be troubled
With thy discourse.

What I shall say unto you
Can easily be verified.

No, no,
I forbid thee to justify thy self.

For the last time yet give me leave to say,
That it is you alone whom I adore,
That I am wholly yours.

Well, let me see then,
If I have any power yet in thy soul.

Madame, command, you shall be satisfied.


Say nothing more then to excuse thy self,
And leave me to depart. this I command,
Obey me in this point.

For such a perfect Lover as I am,
It is a crime to obey too readily.

No, no, I have some power upon thy spirit,
Show thy respect by thy obedience,

Love by respect is very ill expressed,
Who can obey well, knows not to love,
This favorable council, cruel Beauty,
Was given to Carlos.

Yes to Carlos faithful,
But this fatal advise, whereof thou do
Presume so much, was never given unto
Carlos inconstant,

Madame, what is my crime?


Ungrateful, I will tell it thee, it is true
I had for thee something about my heart
That savoured of tenderness and that
I know not what began to differ little
From the toy called Love; at last I was
Tainted with that disease, when for my punishment
I knew my love produeed but thy hate;
True, thou feel'st it no more, now that thou see
That I am touched; I become trouble some
To him that is dear to me; now that my flame
Appears, thine is consumed, and beginning
To love, I cease to be beloved. Beloved?
what have I said'? I learn by the effects,
That thou feignest always, and did never love me
What can thou answer to excuse thy self.
So just a reproach cannot but confound thee;
Thou striv'st not more to justify thy self,
Thy silence speaks thee guilty and confounded.

This trouble which appears in my countenance
Proceeds from your injustice, not my crime.

What have I said here which thou can deny?
Defend thy self.

You have forbidden me
To justify my self. I fear you would be
Offended still with my discourse.

No, no
Speak, Carlos, now my anger's vanished;
Although thou should be false, and prove inconstant.
In such a high degree as to betray me,
I might complain thereof, but could not hate thee
And whatsoever change thy heart should make.
I should excuse thee if thou did desire it.

Upon your fair hands for this sweet expression,
Let me imprint my joy, and my resentment.

WHat do I see?


But Madame, your suspicions
Injute my love extremely.

My suspicions
Give Carlos intimation that I love him.

You love him?


Heaven! what hear I?


O hard Fortune!


I must dispose my self to dye, he will kill me --
Father.

Unworthy object of my anger
In stly provoked, I Am thy enemy,
Call me no more thy Father: how! presum'st thou
To Offend me in fo high degree as thus
Against the rules of reason and of honor
To come to Carlos at his house by night,
And in despising the Religious Cloister
Whereto I Have destined thee, to give thy self
Over to base amors?

I do beseech you,
Hear me, grant me that savor, will you, Sir
Refuse me?

Yes, every thing except death.


Hear equitic oppressed by my mouth,
If her flame be a crime, I m guilty only;
Yes if it be a fault, daigne to remember,
That I am the cause on it, and whom you ought
Only to punish, be more just without
Being more gentle, save the innocent.
And destroy the offender.

No, against me
Bend all your fury, if it be a crime
To love, it is a virtue to be loved:
The tenderness which I resent for Carlos
Denotes his merit, and setts forth my weakness:
And if my passion be worthy death,
Carlos is free, and I alone am guilty.

Perfidious, thou shall dye then.


Oh, abandon
That thought.

Then Carlos with my honor take
Away my life, that is the only way
To make her crime safe; nothing but my death
Can stop her punishment.

Fear nothing from me,
I have respect for you, and since I could not
Appease your anger. I oppose no further
But rather press you now that Isabella
May perish

How? do you press my destruction?
Oh now is the fatal moment, wherein I
Have just cause to complain of destiniie
My heart is pierced with grief to see you here
With such injustice to become my judge,
And not my complice. I was well resolved,
Carlos, to dye, and quarreled not with fate,
So long as I thought to expire for thee;
But I believed not in this adventure
That Love as well as Nature would betray me,
And that I should at last go to the grave
Thus by a Fathers stroke, and Lovers sentence.

Madame, I Have said but what I should have said:
Once more I do repeat it, since your daughter
Must dye, Sir, and I cannot hinder it,
Content your self to strike, but pray mistake not
The bosom, here direct your strokes, it is here
That Isabella's lodged, here she is Mistress,
Here she is criminal, here you must assault her
To punish her, and in peircing my heart,
You cannot miss her.

Oh, believe him not;
Turn your arms here.

Ready to shed my blood,
I feel my tears flow, and my choler's cold:
I only by a sudden strange effect
Am vanquished in the fight, let us feign yet,
Carlos, your cunning for a little time
Retards her Punishment, but fatisfy me
Upon a thing that brought me here, and wick
Does trouble me extreemely tell me truly,
Is my Son here, or no; if he be here,
His death is but too certain.

I assure you,
He is not here, Sir.

Since you do assure me,
I will not doubt it.

WE are free at last
From the Dukes hands.

O Heaven! is it possible?
Fabritio yet present him to mine eyes?
I gave, Sir, too much credit to your words. --

He was not here, Sir, when I said them to you,


Thou blinded Son, through what ingratitude
Build'st thou thy pleasures upon my disquiet?
What has made thee despise a Fathers Will,
whom thou know cherishes thy life so much
And why in violating all the rights
Of nature, do thou make so small account
Of the light which thou owe me? Ungrateful?

The care, Sir, of my safety troubleeh you
Too much, I do not hate the light, but love is
Less then Climene.

I commanded thee
To quit this residence.

But I received
Another order.

How! from whom?


From Love.


Love makes no laws but for those that will take 'em;
And reason now forbids thee to embrace it

Oh reason, Sir, had left me, and I was
Too much enchained, to depart.

Can thou
Stay without shame, after an infidelity?

Climene is as constant as she is fair:
My spirit was struck with an injust suspicion,
I Am disabused, and she is ready here
To follow me.

To follow thee?


Yes Sir,
To follow him, I have engaged my self;
Though his condition be changed, I am not.

I always doubted till this very moment.
Whether a woman could love constantly;
But if your love has any reason with it,
Haste you to go out of his fatal cuntry.

There Is nothing that shall stop my stepps to morrow
Sir, I swear to you. --

Friend, thou shall not swear.


If you believe it not, I do assure you,
You are in an extreme error; who can stay us?

Pehaps, It may be I.


You?


Yes, I will
Tell you a sad adventure, which should be
Equally grievous to us both; Climene
Is by a fatal chance committed to
My guard, and I Am responsible for her.
I Have the Dukes order for it, and to add
To the misfortune, I thought to have taken
Climene, and I took your sister for her.

What! this was then the cause which troubled you
So much but now?

You have but little reason
To doubt of it; but understand my trouble
In this extremity, if Climene flies,
I shall be forced to expose Isabella
Instead of her to the Dukes passions:
I love her, and it is now no longer time
To disguise my thoughts to you, Judge, I pray you,
If in this danger I ought to expose her.

How great is our misfortune?


Not so great
As it appears unto you; to be free
Of all scare, get ye gone all four togeither.
The Duke will be reduced afterward
To be appeased.

This is a most sure way;
But whence proceeds this noise?

Sir, diverse men
Armed with halberds desire speech with you.

It Is the Duke and his Guards, sure, their design
Surpriseth me.

I have lost all my hope.
Carlos, assuredly my sonne's discovered.

We will be presently cleared on that point.
Without light let Fabritio stay here,
And if he doubts that they are come to seek him
Behind this false wall he may hide himself:
See, how it turns; before his death my Father
Fearing the malice of his enemies,
Caused it to be made in secret for him,
And I know that there is no wit so subtle,
That can find out Fabritio in this place.

To save thy life, do this, Son, I conjure thee;


And I Climene pray thee.


I obey
As son, and I obey no less as Lover.

Let Us cease discourse, and go forth presently.


Heaven! must I always be distracted thus
Twixt fear and hope, and must so just a love
Have such a rigid fortune? the Duke loves,
Or abhorres her, and I know that there is reason
To fear all things from him that hops nothing;
And that? bove all things it is dangerous
To be competitor with his Prince, and Rival
Unto his Master. But what^ hear I not
Some person walk, at if he would come to me?

I Have passed through a straight way, now I enter
Into a greater, yet am still in doubt,
My hope's confounded, and my spirits dark,
Which should light me in these obscurities?
Am I'mongst mortals? am I in some cave?
Am I upon the earth, or in is center?
Murdered Fabritio offers himself
To my remembrance, would Heaven punish me
For his unjust death? but I hear a noise,
Who Is there?

Fabritio.


Fabritio!
Appears his Fantasme here then for my punishment,
And am I sunk down into Hell alive
To suffer for the evils I Have made him suffer?

I hear the Dukes voice, which I know full well.
Is it you then, Sir Duke?

The art not deceived.
I am the author of thy death, I will not
Say any thing unto thee for to save
My life, thou can without crime take it from him
Who has taken thine from thee, all the fear which
Rests unto me in this sad misfortune,
Proceeds from my crime, not from my death;
And if now any grief oppresses me,
It Is not to dye, but to dye culpable.

He thinks me still dead, I will profit by
This error. --
Duke, you have just cause to fear
My fury, your fate now is in my power,
Nothing can stop the course of my revenge;
I can now sacrifice your blood to mine;
But, Sit, you are my Prince, and I le not do it;
Injustice I abhor, and notwithstanding
My anger, I would rather suffer it
Then execute it.

The mote thy respect
Appears for me, the more unjust's thy death
And the more black my crime; by this, my fault
Becomes doubly condemnable, the less
Sevete thou art in punishing me, the more
I Am worthy punishment. But if thy shadow
Pretends to respect me, what obliges thee
To persecute me thus in every place?
How comes it that thou do confer upon me
Imperfect favouts? why do thou pursue me?
What is it thou do desire?

Since you ordain it
I Will speak it then; know, Sir, that this your trouble
Shall never see an end before you cease,
To love Climene.

Cease to love Climene?
Oh! that is too much presumption, I may cease
To live, but not to love her, to obtain
Thy wishes, thou should ask a possible thing;
But I should have abused thee if I had
Flattered thy hope that I would cease to love
That charming Beauty.

To love in this manner
Is to love like a tyrant.

Well, I know
That I love like a tyrant, but no matter:
Know also that. Love who gives Law to me,
Is yet a blinder tyrant far then I:
To force me to love this ungrateful Mistress,
He has to much strength, and I so much weakness
Only the hope that I can give thee is,
Never to see her more, yet still to love her.

He that can lose the object, can lose also
The flame, the heart houlds not what the eye is
Deprived of, Love from our will has his power;
To cease to love, there needs but the desire:
To put out all your flames, quench all your hope,
And yield Climene to my constancy.

But if I should do so, what is thy design?


To marry her.


To marry her? what! art thou
Not dead then?

What have I said?


Thou should be
Of The number of the living for this works;
Who cherishes a body, must not be
A shadow. Speak, and believe that thy death
Has cost me tears.

He feigneth for to know me,
And to destroy me afterward. --

He answeareth not a word; Lets seek about.
But least he should go forth, it is requisite
To keep this port: to know too where I am,
It Is best to make a noise; hola! who is there?
Some one come to me.

Heaven! whereto am I
Reduced? but let me, ere they bring a light
Advaunce to wards the wall, and hide my self
Behind it.

I Will be cleared in this doubt,
Here comes a light.

Do we not see the Duke?


See I again my Mistress?


Oh! we sought
Your Highness every where.

Is this enchantment?
Where am I?

In my house.


But where is he?


Who, Sir?


Your Son.


My Son.
Your Highness is abused.

I Have speaken with him;
Use no deceit toward me.

Those are visions.


They are truths, but he cannot come forth, seek carefully
On every side.
Oh Carlos how I fear!

I say, be not afraid.


Sir, I Have seen nothing.


Heaven! what new prodegie is this? Judge all
If I have reason to believe my self
Enchanted: I went forth the garden, thinking
To see before mine eyes Fabritios Ghost,
When suddenly I fell into a precipice;
And passing through places which I know not,
Arrived here, where to increase the horror
Of my sad soul, his shadow once again
Appeared before me, spoke long time unto me,
And used persuasions to make me cease
To love Climene, and to yield her to him.
This discourse gave me much incertaintie
Of his condition; I doubted if
He was dead; but surprised and amazed
By this success, I need no more to doubt it.
Would that it plased Heaven he were alive,
I should be free then of that sad remorse
Which wounds my conscience, I would do him justice,
And banishing my fires, would satisfy
My self in rendering him happy.

Sir,
It is an easy generosity
To lament, an oppressed enemy
That is no longer to be feared, you think
My son dead, and on that account, bewail him,
But if he were alive indead, you would
Be less humane.

I would not break my word.
By Heaven, by fair Climene, by all nature,
I swear to you Alphonso, that if now
Fabritio yet alive should by a miracle.
Appear before mine eyes, so far would I
Be from opposing still his just desires
That I would willing lie resign unto him.
That Beauty so beloved and Cherished.

Behold me living then, most generous Prince,
Feep your word and your oath, and make me happy.

Is this a Fantasme? Heaven!


Shake of your fear.
It is Fabritio living, and his death
Is but a feigned thing.

Sir, at your feet
I humbly do expect the blessed effect
Of what you promised.

I Will keep my word,
Climene's yours.

Sir, favor my poor family
In every point, givs Carlos too in marriage
Unto my daughter, and approve with me
Their innocent desires,

I humble crave
That favor from your Highness

I consent to it;
Carlos, enjoy your wish, although I am
Deceived by your artifice; but losing
My Mistress, I lose my injustice too:
In not betraying me, you did betray
My glory, who commands ill, should be ill
Obey'd', unjust designs may justly be
Destroyed: Come follow me, and whilst your joys
Are making ready, rell me by what Art
The Amourous Fantasme played his subtle part.

LEt me Star gaze a while, and calculate
Those Heavens, to know our fortune, or our fate
Before I dare to speak; I cannot see
One cloud appear that should discourage me;
It Is a good omen: Fair Queen of this night,
Not Cynthia, but a Goddess far more bright,
To you I kneel. From him, whose glory is
To offer you a pleasing Sacrifice,
I mean the ambitious Poet I am come,
Humbly to beg a favorable doom
Upon his Fantasme, who although he be
At the full point of his felicity
A perfect body now, yet if you frown
Upon his action, and so cry him down,
No more a feigned Fantasme to be made,
He dies indead, and flies into a shade.


