It Is even so!


Good old friend Protestation.


Old Common Prayer! By what new Order? C.


Even -- Enter (as after Common Prayer) Allegiance.


Well met all three, Let this be Diurnall'd.


In good time. But as you were saying.


Even the same that was from the beginning. The Law has new taken breath: and I
am bound (ye know) to take notice of it


Good,


Very good I trow. Come, Friends all now. Is It not?


All making Friends
What then becomes of Covenants blessed ends?

What say you, Sir? Have we not yet had ends enough? I hope you would not, or
you shall not see yet an utter end of All


Of all Impiety and Prophanness though.


Agreed.


Agreed.


Agreed


Agreed by all! How can this be? You, Protestation, not for Popery.


Nor I.


Nor I.


Nor you? nor you? I fear.


But we fear nothing.


We Are on sure ground.


Condemned.


Unheard.


The Bill (you know) was found.
One speaks not out Supremacy: the other
Plainly draws down the Daughter from the Mother.

Where was Supremacy, when you found that Bill?

In Parliament And there it will be still.

With the Kings Headship. Thus far Papists go,
Come you not short of them. In doing so
You justify, what yet you would condemn.

We justify our selves, against you and them.

Let Popery stand or fall. All Is one to me,
Excepted in your Bill from Popery.

In some respect. But yet you are not free.

Till faulty found by just Supremacy.

In's lawful Politic capacity.

See you but who comes here?


We (...) him not. He has in us no part, nor Scot, nor (...)


Yet, by your leave, as good an interest.
In a free King and Parliament, as the best.
Shall the whole Body scor-free hoise up sail?
And the Lot fall so heavy on the Tail?

You speak, as if you lately came from School;
A Camisado of the Birchin tool.

Has that old Ape transported you so soon;
To make you all turn Mimikes the first Moon?

Which of us changed?


You Are changling Monkeys all,
Fie on this mock-show This is your Whites-Hall.

Now it is out Is It not?


Out and let it be,
Out, or In, All; Excepted none for me.
It is a common Case, The cause ye know)
The good Old Cause, the same for weal and Woe:
The Cause was yours, first; deny it not:
Then, yours; and carried on with Scot and Lot.

Who were the Keepers of our Liberties?


who acted in your Kings Capacities?
Prerogative and Legal. To proceed,
Is not to innovate, when once agreed.
For, or against: I did but prosecute,
What you began; I did but execute,
What you designed.

To lay aside (for shame;)
The power; both name and thing!

The very same.

O. times!

I; Times they were indeed, that by degrees.
Drew out the Brewing to the very Lees.
The Lees you like not; yet the Barme, your own;
So was the Brewer too; as will be shown.

He Is drunk.


It Is then with pledging you.


you drank,
Too deep.

All was but what was left, I thank
You for'^. It Was but a very little Snuff,
I was well satisfied you had enough.

Oh impudence! Did we not all we might.
To hinder such wrong doing and keep Right?

You did indeed keep all the right you could.
But why should you have all? yet it is made good,
This very act was yours: next to be done.
As near a kin, as Father is to Son.
For, stand we not upon one bottom all?
One common Principle elenchical!
Common-Supremacy: the Peoples right:
The Commons due, clear as the Noonday light.
You, Protestation, first began to stride,
Before what ever since was laid aside.
One common Juno is our Mother known:
Withour a Jove, such Martial brood to own.
'Twas you, who first Declared the Name of King,
Whilst you Usurpt the power, an useless thing.
The Beast from Horns to Hoofs is still the same:
From Forty one to Fifty. And the Name
Of Fifty nine shows, one Cow Calv'd us all.
Brothers, together let us or stand, or fall.

Brother us no Brothers, far from our intent,
We ever were for King and Parliament.

Ye were, so far as served your turn to say,
You had his Office. But supplied ( I pray)
By whom? Who did Le Roys avisera,
Whilst He was inter quatuor Maria?
Oh! With what kindness you met at Edgehill!
How Love betwixt you showed his utmost skill!
What Complements 'twixt Him and your Gallant!
Your prime Gallant! But what! Here comes our last!
I The worst has past.

H'as smelt us out.

Smelt we so strong of Blood!

He looks, as it he would be understood!

Beyond expression. I. Hangs my Nose in your light!
Time was you followed it; and then went right:
When from the Rising to the Setting Sun,
Clocks, Dialls, Glasses, measured all was done,
By this Majestic Standard of all motion;
The length of every ones days at my Devotion.
The longest hour of life and last of Death,
Kings, Lords and Commons shaddow'd by my breath.
I prayed and preached, I fasted and I fought:
And never rested whilst for you I wrought.
For you (I say) by you, and with you all,
All that I did, I did; in great and small.
You threw out Kingship; I maintained your Act:
The Cards were often shuffeld, often pact.
Then came I up: your servant of the Sword,
Hight Constable. Me thinks you should afford
Some better measure to so good a friend,
Who made and kept your Peace unto the end.
You know, I was no lawful Magistrate:
But Sing'lat Minister of a lawless Stare.
Thus am I but your Creature. Why should you,
Making your own peace, make so much ado
To hinder mine? 'Twas you good Protestation,
First took me in, to save your reputation.
And well you might. You only could maintain,
God and the King, against the Pope and Spain.
So much you had retrenched your former Vow,
Made at the Font, (as I may tell you now)
Against the whole malignant World; not that
Spot only, which brought up some elvish Brat
Of that old Whore of Babylon. By which breach.
My then-new-Sainted Horse let in to Preach,
Taught your cast Serving-men and Tapsters, how
To stand their ground, and win the masterie.
Great was the Company of Preachers then:
Kings with their Armies then began to flee.
My Horse and I had thanks. Thus you may see,
How Right at first gave Might, then Might made Right:
Your Right to let me in to get your Might:
Your Armies first; and then your Parliaments.

What? Will he never ha'done?

These Instruments.
Of your Commands have taught you to obey.

I Am almost out of breath: yet this shall say,
Your Might so got made new Right every way.
If you were Right; How could I then be wrong?
The Spirit you acted by in me was strong.
That be my Charge. What you had in projection,
'Twas I alone that brought unto perfection.
I was in Covenant with your Spirit: the Letter
I left to such who understood no better.
'Twas that enabled me to work such wonders;
Strange even to your selves, as Sky-clear-thunders.
It was a Noonday Spirit, with new Light
Through so much darkness guided us aright.
He led us all. Your selves confessed it often:
Whilst some admired, others vainly Scoft.
You veiled; I knew Him well; I did in truth:
H' was my Familiar, in very sooth.
He gave and took that all-commanding breath,
Which in these Nostrils gave the Law to death.
My time being come, our Covenants well t'agree,
That Spirits acting left the world with me.
Now the Tide's turned: Rivers do now run back,
Over my Head laid low, through Hands grown slack,
To purge thy Heart out, (yet thou will not see,
The only help is wholly to agree)
Thou faithless Land, accursed Oceaena,
Since thou art become one great Akeldama.
God and the King deposed by the Peoples Right,
Have tried Leviathans utmost lawless might.
Think not, your hollow dawbing will endure,
Be wise betime: Save, or Lose all; be sure;
For, though the King look only at the effect;
Foregoing Causes God cannot neglect.

He Is mad: and rants in King Cambyses vein,

The sad Accomptant of your loss and Gain.
To Saintship and Kingship-Conspiracie:
An universal full Apostasy.

He has spoke sense.


What? not the sense o'th'House.


What? Had they done?


They Are gone. I thought we should make thee House too hot for'm.


What house?


This, this same paltry Playhouse of theirs. Your poyets (as they call um) why
they will make you an House of any thing, and any thing of an House, to serve
their turn. These Players (I have heard our Minister say) are in plain Greek
such very Hypocrites


Whoop Holliday! What have we here? George of Horseback! Upon the Post there!
Don't ye see


For Gods sake! How does he kill the Dragon?


Even (as 't please the Painter, I Will warrant.


Ho! What Is this?


An old Bishops square Cap. Is It not?


And here is another like it.


A Judges, this; it should be. Let Us see. We have not lost our labor yet.


I believe, they had not quite done, they are gone in such have.


The fools had never left their bawbles behind them, if they had not been
frighted. What? a Vizzard too? Who was this for, trow? What a Nose it has


I would we could have lit but upon some of um.


I don't think, but if we light handsomely upon their Master over the way
yonder, we shall make some good discovery yet among his Truhans


Pish! He Is.


Well neighbor, what has been the business?


Come if you will walk away, I Will tell you.


VIVE LE ROY. 1660.


C'Est presqu' en ce temps cy un mot celebrieux,
Par Grecs and par Latins and par des Hebrieux,
Jesu de Nazaret and Charles d' Angle terre,
La fin de l'un and de l'autre, des meurtriers la guerre.
J. C.

