THE Audience are entertained by Isntrumental Music and a Symphany (being a
wild Air suitable to the Region) which having prepared the Scene, a Lantdchap
of the West- Indies is discerned; distinguished from other Regions by the parcht
and bare Tops of distant Hills, by Sands shining on the shores of Rivers, and
the Natives, in feathered Habits and Bonnets, carrying, in Indian Baskets,
Ingots of Gold and Wedges of Silver. Some of the Natives being likewise
discerned in their natural sports of Hunting and Fishing. This prospect is made
through a wood, differing from those of European Climats by representing of
Coco-Trees, Pines and Palmitos; and on the boughs of other Trees are seen
Munkies, Apes and Parrots; and at farther distance Valleys of Sugarcanes

The Symphay being ended: The chief Priest of Peru enters with his Attendant
after him. The Priest is clothed in a Garment of Feathers longer then any of
those that are worn by other Natives, with a Bonnet whose ornament of Plumes
does likewise give him a distinction from the rest, and carries in his hand a
gilded Verge. He likewise, because the Peruvians were worshipers of the Sun,
carries the Figure of the Sun on his Bonnet and Breast

THus fresh did Nature in our world appear,
When first her Roses did their leaves unfold:
E're she did use Art's Colors, and e're fear
Had made her pale, or she with cares looked old.
When various sports did Man's loved freedom show,
And still the free were willing to obey;
Youth did to Age, and Sons to Parents bow.
Parents and Age first taught the Laws of sway.
When yet we no just motive had to fear
Our bolder Incas would by Arms be raised;
When, temp'rately, they still contented were,
As great Examples, to be only praised.
When none for being strong did seek reward,
Nor any for the space of Empire strove:
When Valor courted Peace and never cared
For any recompense, but public love.
We fettered none, nor were by any bound;
None followed Gold through Lab'rynths of the Mine:
And that which we on Strands of Rivers found,
Did only on our Priests in Temples shine.
Then with his Verge, each Priest
Could, like an Exorcist,
The coldest of his Students warm,
And thus provoke them with a Charm.
The Speech being ended, the Priest waves his Verge, and his Attendant, with
extraordinary Activity, performs the Somerset: and afterward, waving his Verge
toward the Room where the Music are placed behind the Curtain, this Song is
sung

Whilst yet our world was new,
When not discovered by the old;
E're beggered Slaves we grew,
For having Silver Hills, and Strands of Gold.
We danced and we sung,
And looked ever young,
And from restraints were free,
As waves and winds at Sea.

When wildly we did live,
E're crafty Cities made us tame:
When each his whole would give
To all, and none peculiar right did claim.
We danced and we sung,
etc.

When none did riches wish,
And none were rich by business made;
When all did Hunt or Fish,
And sport was all our labor and our trade.
We danced and we sung,
etc.

When Forts were not devised,
Nor Cittadils did Towns devour:
When lowly sheds sufficed,
Because we feared the Weather more than Power.
We danced and we sung,
etc.

When Garments were not worn,
Nor shame did nakedness resent:
Nor Poverty bred scorn:
When none could want, and all were innocent.
We danced and we sung,
etc.

After this Song, a Rope descends out of the Clouds, and is stretched to a
stifness by an Engine, whilst a Rustic Air is played, to which two Apes from
opposite sides of the Wood come out, listen, return; and, coming out again,
begin to dance, then, after a while, one of them leaps up to the Rope, and
there dances to the same Air, whilst the other moves to his measures below
Then both retire into the Wood. The Rope ascends

AN Alman and Corante are played: after which a Trumpet-Ayre changes the Scene;
where a Fleet is discerned at distance, with a prospect of the Sea and Indian
Coast; the Ships bearing in their Flags the Spread-Eagle, to denote the
Austrian Family; and on the right side are seen some Natives of Peru, pointing
with amazment to the Fleet, (as never having had the view of Ships before) and
in a mourning condition take their leaves of their wives and children; because
of an ancient Prophecy amongst them, which did signify, That a Bearded People
(those of Peru having ever held it uncomely to wear Beards) should spring out
of the Sea, and conquer them. The object having remained a while, the Priest of
the Sun enters with his Attendant

IN all the soft delights of sleep and ease,
Secure from War, in peaceful Palaces,
Our Incas lived: but now I see their doom:
Guided by winds, the Bearded People come!
And that dire Prophecy must be fulfilled,
When Two shall ruin what our Twelve did build.
It Is long since first the Sun's chief Priest foretold,
That cruel men, Idolaters of Gold,
Should pass vast Seas to seek their Harbor here.
Behold, in floating Castles they appear!
Mine eyes are struck! Away, away
With gentle Love's delicious sway!
The Incas from their wives must fly!
And ours may soon believe
We mourn to see them grieve,
But shall rejoice to see them die.
For they by dying safety gain:
And when they quit,
In Death's cold fit,
Love's pleasure, they shall lose Life's pain.
The Priest having waved his Verge, his Attendant performs the Trick of
Activity, called the Seahorse

NO more, no more,
Shall we drag to the Shore
Our Nets at the Ebb of the Flood;
Nor after we lay
The toils for our Prey,
Shall we meet to compass the VVood.
Nor with our Arrows e're delight,
To get renown
By taking down
The soaring Eagle in his flight.
Make haste! make haste!
You delights that are past!
And do not to our thoughts appear:
Lest vainly we boast
Of joys we have lost,
And grieve to reckon what we were.
The Incas glory now is gone!
Dark grows that light,
Which cheered our sight,
Set is their deity, the Sun.
All creatures when they breed
May then with safety feed:
All shall have times for liberty but we.
We, who their Masters were,
Must now such Masters fear,
As will no season give us to be free.

This Song being ended, a dolfull Air is heard, which prepares the entrance of
two Indians, in their feathered habits of Peru; they enter severally from the
opposite sides of the Wood, and gazing on the face of the Scene, fall into a
Mimick Dance, in which they express the Argument of the Prospect, by their
admiration at the sight of the Ships, (which was to those of Peru a new and
wonderful object) and their lamentation, at beholding their Countrymen in deep
affliction, and taking their leaves of their wives and children

A Symphany, consisting of four Tunes, prepares the change of the Scene; the
prospect consisting of plain Indian Country, in which are discerned at distance
two Peruvian Armies marching, and ready to give Battle, being led by the two
Royal Brethren, sons of the last Inca, Armed with Bows, Glaves, and Spears,
and wearing Quivers on their backs. The object having continued a while, the
Priest of the Sun enters with his Attendant

HOw fatal did our Inca's passion prove,
Whilst long made subject to a foreign love?
Poor Lovers, who from Empire's arts are free,
By nature may entirely guided be,
They may retire to shady Cottages,
And study there only themselves to please:
For few consider what they mean or do;
But Nations are concerned when Monarchs woe.
And though our Inca by no Law was tied
To love but one, yer could he not divide
His public Empire as his private Bed.
In Thrones each is to whole Dominion bred.
He blindly prized his younger son's desert,
Dividing Empire as he did his heart.
And since his death, this made the Younger dare
T'affront the Elder's Sov'raignty with war.
Ambition's monstrous stomach does increase
By eating, and it fears to starve, unless
It still may feed, and all it sees devour.
Ambition is not tired with toil, nor cloyed with power.
This Speech being ended, the Priest waves his Verge, and his Attendant very
activly performs the Spring; and they departing, this Third Song is sung

Twelve Incas have successivly
Our spacious Empire swayed;
Whose power whilst we obeyed,
We lived so happy and so free,
As if we were not kept in awe
By any Law,
Which martial Kings aloud proclaim.
Soft conscience, Nature's whispering Orator,
Did teach us what to love or to abhor;
And all our punishment was shame.
Our late great Inca fatally,
Did by a second wife
Eclipse his shining life,
Whilst reason did on love rely.
Those Rays she often turned and checked,
Which with direct
Full beams should have adorned his known
And first authorized Race: But Kings who move
Within a lowly sphere of private love,
Are too domestic for a Throne.
Now rigid War is come, and Peace is gone,
Fear governs us, and jealousy the Throne.
Ambition has our Chiefs possessed:
All now are wak't, all are alarmed:
The weary know not where to rest,
Nor dare the harmless be unarmed.

After this Song a warlike Air is played, to which succeeds a martial Dance,
performed by four Peruvians, armed with Glaves, who enter severally from
opposite sides of the VVood, and express by their motions and gestures the
fury of that Civil War, which, by the ambition of the younger Brother, has
engaged their Country; and then depart in pursuit of each other

A Symphany consisting of four Tunes, prepares the change of the Scene, which
represents a great Peruvian Army, put to flight by a small Body of Spaniards.
This object is produced in pursuance of the main Argument; for the Spaniards
having first bred an amazment in the Natives, by the noise and fire of their
Guns, and having afterward subverted the Elder Inca by assisting the Younger;
did in a short time attain the Dominion over both by Conquest, The object of
this Scene having remained a while, the Priest of the Sun enters with his
Attendant

What dark and distant Region bred
For war that bearded Race,
Whose every uncouth face
We more then Death's cold vissage dread?
They could not still be guided by the Sun.
Nor had they every night
The Moon t'inform their sight,
How durst they seek those dangers which we shun?
Sure they must more then mortal be,
That did so little care
For life, or else they are
Surer of future life than we.
But how they reasons Laws in life fulfill
We know not; yet we know,
That scorn of life is low,
Compared to the disdain of living ill.
And we may judge that all they do
In life's whole scene is bad,
Since they with Arms are clad
Defensive and Offensive too.
In Nature it is fear that makes us arm;
And fear by guilt is bred:
The guiltless nothing dread,
Defense of seeking, nor designing harm.
The Priest of the Sun waves his Verge, and his Attendant performs the
self-Spring

THose foreign shapes so strange appear,
That wonderful they seem:
And strangeness breeds esteem;
And wonder does engender fear:
And from our fear does adoration rise:
Else why do we incline
To think them Powers divine,
And that we are ordained their sacrifice*
1. When we our Arrows draw,
It is with dreadful awe:
2. Moving toward them whom we are loath to meet,
3. As if we marched to face our destiny:
4. Not trusting to our Arrows but our feet,
As if our business were to fly, to fly!

That durst adventure life
Through the tempestuous strife
Of seas, and every raging wind.
Through seas so wide, and for their depth so feared,
That we by leaps as soon
May reach th'ascended Moon,
As guess through what vast dangers they have steered.

When we our Arrows draw, etc.

This Song being ended, a Sarabrand is played, whilst two Spaniards enter from
the opposite sides of the Scene, exactly clothed and armed according to the
custom of their Nation: and, to express their triumph after the victory over
the Natives, they solemnly uncloak and unarm themselves to the Tune, and
afterward dance with Castanietos

A Doleful Pavin is played to prepare the change of the Scene, which
represents a dark Prison at great distance; and farther to the view are
discerned Racks, and other Engines of torment, with which the Spaniards are
tormenting the Natives and English Mariners, which may be supposed to be
lately landed there to discover the Coast. Two Spaniards are likewise
discovered, sitting in their cloakes, and appearing more solemn in Ruffs, with
Rapiers and Daggers by their sides; the one turning a Spit, whilst the other is
basting an Indian Prince, which is roasted at an artificial fire. This object
having remained a while, the Priest of the Sun enters with his Attendant

THese study arts of lengthening languishment,
And strengthening those for pains whom pain has spent.
They make the Cramp, by waters drilled, to ceise
Men ready to expire,
Baste them with drops of fire,
And then, they lay them on the Rack for ease.
What Race is this, who for our punishment
Pretend that they in haste from Heaven were sent,
As just destroyers of Idolatry?
Yet will they not permit
We should our Idols quit,
Because the Christian Law makes Converts free.
Or if, to please their Priests, some Chief permits
A few of us to be their Proselytes;
Yet all our freedom then is but deceit.
They ease us from our Chains
To make us take more pains,
Lightning our legs to give our shoulders weight.
And other Christian strangers landing here,
Strait, to their jealous sight, as spies appear:
And those, they so much worse then Heathens deem,
That they must tortured die.
The world still waste must lie,
Or else a prison be to all but them.
His speech being ended, he waves his Verge, and his Attendant performs the
Porpoise

IF Man from sovereign reason does derive
Over Beasts a high prerogative,
Why does he so himself behave,
That Beasts appear to be
More rational then he?
Who has deserved to be their slave.
How comes wild cruelty in human breasts?
Proud Man more cruel is than Beasts;
When beasts by hunger are enraged,
They no long pains devise
For dying enemies,
But kill, and eat, and are asswag'd.
So much is Man refined in cruelty
As not to make men quickly dye.
He knows by death all pains are past.
But as he has the skill
A thousand ways to kill,
So has he more to make pains last.
When Beasts each other chale and then devour,
It Is Natures Law, necessity,
Which makes them hunt for food, and not for power:
Men for Dominion, Art's chief vanity,
Contrive to make mend die;
Whose blood through wantonness they spil,
Not having use of what they kill.

This Song being ended, a mournful Air is played, preparing the entrance of
three Peruvians, limping in silver-fetters. They are driven into the Wood by an
insulting Spaniard, with a Truncheon; then enter again laden with Indian
baskets full of golden Ingors, and silver Wedges, and lying down with the
weight of their burdens, are raised by the blows of the Spaniard, and fall
into a halting Dance, till the Spaniard, reviving their weariness with his
Truncheon, drives them again into the Wood

A Symphony prepares the last change of the Scene, and an Army is discerned at
distance, consisting of English and Peruvians; the Van is led by the English,
who are distinguished by the Ensigns of England, and their Red-Coats. The Rear
is brought up by the Peruvians, who are known by their feathered Habits,
Claves, and Spears. There is likewise discerned a Body of armed Spaniards,
their backs turned, and there Rear scattered as if put to flight. These
imaginary English Forces may seem improper, because the English had made no
discovery of Peru, in the time of the Spaniards first invasion there; but yet
in Poetical Representations of this nature, it may pass as a Vision discerned
by the Priest of the Sun, before the matter was extant, in order to his
Prophecy

This object having remained a while, the Priest of the Sun enters with his
Attendant

WE on our knees these Spaniards did receive
As gods, when first they taught us to believe.
They came from Heaven, and us over heights would lead,
Higher then e're our sinful fathers fled.
Experience now (by whose true eyes, though slow,
We find at last, what often too late we know)
Has all their cous'ning miracles discerned:
It Is she that makes unlettered mankind learned,
She has unmask't these Spanish dark Divines:
Perhaps they upward go,
But hasten us below,
Where we, through dismal depths, must dig in Mines.
When first the valiant English landed here,
Our reason then no more was ruled by fear:
They straight the Spaniards Riddle did unfold,
Whose Heaven in caverns lies of others Gold.
Our griefs are past, and we shall cease to mourn,
For those whom the insulting Spaniards scorn,
And slaves esteem,
The English soon shall free;
Whilst we the Spaniards see
Digging for them.
The Priest having ended his Speech, waves his Verge, and his Attendant
performs the double Somerset

The Priest being gone, a wild Air is played, (differing from that in the
First Entry) which prepares the coming in of a Spaniard out of the Wood,
laden with Ingots of Gold, and Wedges of Silver. He makes his footing to the
tune of the Instruments; and after a while he discovers a weariness and
inclination to sleep, to which purpose he lies down, with his basket for his
pillow. Two Apes come in from opposite sides of the Wood, and dance to the
Air. After a while, a great Baboom enters, and joins with them in the Dance.
They wake the Spaniard, and end the Antique Measures with driving him into the
Wood

WE shall no longer fear
The Spanish Eagle darkly hov'ging here;
For though from farthest Climes he hither fled,
And spatiously his wings has spread:
Yet the English Lion now
Does still victorious grow,
And does delight
To make his walks as far
As the other e're did dare
To make his flight.
1 High, 2 high, 3 and high
4 Our Arrows shall sly,
And reach the winged for our prey.
Our Nets we will cast; and Sprindges lay:
The Air, the River, and the Wood,
Shall yield us sport and change of food.

The proud Spaniards our Masters,
When we extol our liberty by feasts,
At Table shall serve,
Or else they shall starve;
Whilst the English shall sit and rule as our guests.

This Song being ended, as Air, consisting of three Tunes, prepares the grand
Dance, three Indians entering first, afterward to them three English Soldiers,
distinguished by their Red-Coats, and to them a Spaniard, who mingling in the
measures with the rest, does in his gestures express pride and sullenness
toward the Indians, and pays a lowly homage to the English, who often salute
him with their feet, which salutation he returns with a more lowly gravity;
whilst the English and the Indians, as they encounter, salute and shake hands,
in sign of their future amity. This Dance being performed, the Entertainment
ends, an

Notwithstanding the great expense necessary to Scenes, and other ornaments in
this Entertainment, there is a good provision made of places for a shilling.
And it shall begin certainly at 3 after noon


