CLimb, Boatswain, climb! and from the height
Of that steep Rock inform thy sight!
From yonder Point our Master call.
I Will here attend our Admiral.
The Mist ascends, and south'rd it grows clear!
Me thinks at distance somewhat does appear,
Which wakens us with hope.

A Sail! a Sail!

It Is English built, or else my sight does fail.

Oho! Oho! another Ship I spy,
And, by their Course, both to this Harbor ply.

She lowers her Main-sail, the wind does rise!

She now bears in, and she does tow a Prize

TO Sea, to Sea! Man out the Boat!

It has not Tide enough to float.

Stir, Mates! stir, stir! and bring more hands:
Shove, shove! and roll her over the Sands!
Lanch forth, and make your Ken!
Both by her Rigging and her Mould
She brings our Countrymen;
And has a rich and heavy Hold.

HO, Mate! ho, ho! what can thou see
From the top-Gallant of that Tree?

The Ship does Anchor cast;
And now her Boat does haste
To reach the Shore.

What see thou more?

Enough to make me hasten down:
For, if my eyes prove true,
The bowels of Peru
Shall be ripped up and be our own.
The Lion Rouse is landed here.

I Will run to meet him at the Peer.
A Tun of yellow Gold,
Concealed within our Hold,
For half my share I scorn to take,
When he is joined with Dragon- Drake.

WElcome to Land my brother of the Sea!
From childhood rockt by winds
and waves like me.
Who never can a danger dread,
Since still in dangerous Tempests bred.
Yet still art safe and calm within thy breast,
As Lovers who in shady Coverts rest.
Thy fame about the world does make her flight,
And flies as swiftly as the wings of light.

My fame does lay her Trumpet down,
When yours does publish your renown.

What is your Prize?

It Is fraught with Spies:
A Carvel rigged at Sivell for this Coast,
To fetch from hence
Intelligence;
But, meeting me, she has her Voyage lost.

Brave friend, will thou now guided be
By that bright Star which ushers me?

What man is that, Loved Admiral,
Who does not hasten at your call?
He must be either deaf, or ever lame,
Who follows not your loud and leading fame.

My course must now not be
Upon the open Sea:
Our Country's foes we must invade
Through Woods, and seek them in the Shade;
And follow them where Phoebus never shines,
Through depths as dark and winding as their Mines.

That which enlightens, and does lead
The world, and all our Vict'ries breed,
We in those Caverns shall behold,
In seeing Man's bright Mistress, Gold.

Boat all our Guns! haste, haste aboar'd!
Unlade! then let our Ships be Moored!
To raise our Fort, some hew down Trees!
Whilst other rig our Pinnaces.
Their watchful Guards let every Sentry keep,
That, after labor, all may safely sleep.
Some over remoter grounds
Walk, and relieve their Rounds:
Whilst some secure each Post
On out-lets of the Coast.
That, after wandering long to trace
VVild Rivers, we may find this place
For our imbarkment free,
To wander more at Sea.

The jealous Spaniards long have understood
The danger of this Harbour's neighborhood.
It Is therefore fit
That thou should leave behind,
To govern it,
A great experienced Mind.

I know it is of high import.
My second thoughts conclude, thou Rouse shall stay,
To finish and secure the Fort;
Whilst we to Venta-Cruz enforce our way.

We must the Main forbear,
And now a Coasting go,
Then up with Rivers steer,
To watch how far they flow.
But if landing we pass
Where Recoes through Foords are long wading.
Then we in pity, alas,
Their Mules must ease of their lading.

A Loof! and aloof! and steady I steer!
It Is a Boat to our wish,
And she slides like a Fish,
When chearily stem'd, and when you row clear.
She now has her trim!
Away let her swim.
Mackrels are swift in the shine of the Moon;
And Herrings in Gales when they wind us,
But, timeing our Oars, so smoothly we run,
That we leave them in shoals behind us.

Then cry, One and all!
Amain! for Whitehall!
The Diegos we will board to rummidge their Hold;
And drawing our Steel, they must draw out their Gold.

Our Master and's Mate, with Bacon and pease,
In Cabins keep aboard;
Each as warm as a Lord:
No Queen, lying in, fies more at her ease.
Whilst we lie in wait
For Reals of Eight,
And for some Gold Quoits, which fortune
must send:
But, alas, how their ears will tingle,
When finding, though still like Hectors we spend,
Yet still all our pockets shall jingle.

Then cry, One and all!
Amain, etc.

But Oh how the Purser shortly will wonder,
When he sums in his Book
All the wealth we have took,
And finds that we will give him none of the Plunder;
He means to abate
The Tyth for the State;
Then for our Owners some part he will discount:
But his fingers are pitched together;
Where so much will stick, that little will mount,
When he reckons the shares of either.

Then cry, One and all!
Amain, etc.

At sight of our Gold, the Boatswain will bristle,
But not finding his part,
He will break his proud heart,
And hang himself strait in the Chain of his VVhistle.
Abaft and before!
Make way to the shore!
Softly as fishes which slip through the stream,
That we may catch their Sentries napping.
Poor little Diegos, they now little dream
Of us the brave VVarriors of Wapping.

Then cry, One and all!
Amain, etc.

GReat VVand'rer of the Sea,
Thy walks still pathless be.
The Races thou do run,
Are known but to the Sun.
And as the walk above,
Where he does yearly move,
We only guess, though him we know,
By great effects below.
So, though thy courses traceless are,
As if conducted by a wandering Star,
Yet by thy deeds all Climes acknowledge thee;
And thou art known and felt as much as he.

So narrow is my merit wrought,
That when such breadth you thus allow my fame,
I stand corrected, and am taught
To hide my story, and to show my shame.

As tireless as thy Body is thy Mind:
No adverse current can thy progress stop.
Thy forward courage leaves all doubts behind
And when thy Anchor's lost, thou keep'st thy Hope.
Welcome! and in my Land be free,
And power full as thou art at Sea.

Monarch of much! and still deserving more
Then I have coasted on the VVestern shore!
Slave to my Queen! to whom thy virtue shows
How low thou can to virtue be;
And, since declared a Foe to all her Foes,
Thou make them lower bow to thee.

Instruct me how my Symerons and I
May help thee to afflict the Enemy.

Afford me Guides to lead my bold
Victorious Seamen to their Gold:
For nothing can afflict them more,
Then to deprive them of that store
With which from hence they furnished are
T'afflict the peacefulll world with war.

Here from my bosom Pedro take,
And him thy chief Conductor make.
Who once was an unhappy slave to them;
But now is free by my deserved esteem.
He is as watchful as the Eye
Of Age still waked with jealousy:
And like experienced Lovers wisely true:
Who after long suspicion find,
They had no cause to be unkind,
And then with second vows their loves renew.

He is, since so deservingly expressed,
Removed but from thy bosom to my breast.

All other ayds required to thy design,
Choose and receive: for all my strenghts are thine.

WInds now may whistle, and waves may dance to 'em,
Whilst Merchants cry out, such sport will undo 'em.
And the Master alowd bids, Lee the Helm, Lee!
But we now shall fear nor the Rocks nor the Sand,
Whilst calmly we follow our Plunder at Land,
When others in storms seek Prizes at Sea.

MArch! March! wheel to the right hand still,
To shun loos footing on that Hill.
From thy Meridian run,
O thou inflaming Sun!
The Air above us else to fire will turn,
And all this Sand beneath like cynders burn.
Now give the word!

Stand!

Stand.

Stand.

Stand.

All firm and Soddain to command!
Halt for our Rear awhile, and then
West from that VVood draw up our Men.
Stand to your Arms till we send out
Our trusty Symerons to Scout.

Scouts I have chosen, who can trace
All the retreats, which in the chase
The Hunted seek; all shades to which they run
When strength leaves them, and they the Hunters shun.

Are these Peruvians friends, or, by surprise,
Must we secure them as our enemies?

Great Chief, they reverence thy renown,
And thou may quarter in their Town.
Yet so advance with care,
In all the shapes of War;
That when the Spaniards know
How well they treat their Foe,
The Entertainment may appear,
Not the effect of Love, but Fear.

Their dwelling seems so fresh and flourishing,
As if it still the Nurs'ry were
Of all the seeds that furnish out the Spring
For every Clime, and all the Year.

Here Nature to her Summer Court retires:
Our Northern Region is the shade,
Where she grows cold, and looks decaid,
And seems to sit by Artificial fires.

Advance, advance,
And in the Rear,
To make our number more appear,
Let all our trusty SYM'RONS spread
Their Ranks, and be by PEDRO led.

All Order with such clemency preserve,
That such as to our power submit,
May take delight to cherish it,
And seem as free as those whom they shall serve.

With Boughs and with Branches trim up our Bowres,
And strew them with Flowers:
To receive such a Guest
As deserves for a Feast
All that the Forest, or the Field,
Or deeper Lakes and Rivers yield.

Still round, and round, and round,
Let us compass the ground.
What man is he who feels
Any weight at his heels?
Since our hearts are so light, that all weighed together,
Agree to a grain, and they weigh not a feather. Land,

The Lord ot the Sea is welcome to And here shall command
All our Wealth, and our Arms;
For his Name more Alarms
The Spaniards, then Trumpets or Drums:
Hark how they cry, Drake comes, Drake comes!

Still round, and round, and round, Let etc.

Though to his Foes like those Winds he is rough,
That meet in a huff:
Yet that storm quickly ends,
When embraced by his friends:
Then he is calm and gentle made
As Loves soft whispers in a shade.

Still round, and round, and round, Let etc.

A Boar so fierce and large,
No Hunter e're did charge.
Advance thy Spear,
And turn him there.

This last encounter he has bravely stood;
But now has lost his courage with his blood.

He foams, and still his Tusks does whet,
As if he still disdained retreat.

The wound you gave him makes him turn his head
To seek the darker shades, where he was bred.

Follow, follow!

Stay my Victorious Boy!
When a courageous Beast does bleed,
Then learn how far you should proceed
To use advantage where you may destroy:
To courage even of Beasts some pity's due;
And where resistance fails, cease to pursue.

Our men have firmly stood and swiftly run:
The game was plentious and the chase is done.

PEDRO in several forms has all
That every where we merit call.

Wary in War as Chiefs grown old;
And yet in sudden dangers bold.
Civil and real too in courts;
Painful in business and in sports.

Behold that Tree which much superior grows
To all that in this Wood
Have many Ages stood:
Beneath whose shade your Warriors may repose.

There let us stay
And turn our Prey
Into a Feast
Till in the West
The Cypress curtain of the night is drawn;
Then forward march as early as the dawn.

Is this that most renowned of Western Trees
On whose Main-top
Thou gav'st me hope
To view the North and South Atlantic Seas?

It is; therefore with speed
Thither, my Chief, proceed:
And, when you climbing have attaind' the height,
Report will grow authentic by your sight.

When from those lofty branches I
The south Atlantic spy
My vows shall higher fly,
Till they with highest Heaven prevail
That, as I see it, I may on it Sail.

No English Keel has yet that Ocean plowed.

If Prophecy from me may be allowed,
Renowned DRAKE, Heaven does decree
That happy Enterprise to thee.
For thou of all the Britains art the first
That boldly durst
This Western World invade;
And as thou now art made
The first to whom that Ocean will be shown,
So to thy Isle thou first shall make it known.

This Prophecy will rise
To higher Enterprise.
The English Lion's Walk shall reach as far
As prosperous Valor dares adventure War.
As Winds can drive, or Waves can bear
Those Ships which boldest Pilots stear.

HOw comes it you Land-men, and
we of the Sea,
Though often mixed together, yet
seldom agree?

A Riddle, which we can find out
no more
Then you can why Seas contest
with the Shore.

We give a shrewd guess how our
quarrels have grown;
For still when at land we are
jointly designed
To the dainty delight of storming
a Town,
You run to the Plunder, and
leave us behind.

Alas, our dear Brothers! How can
we forbear?
But aboard when you have us,
where wonderful Gold
Is shovell'd like Ballast, you are even
with us there:
We fight on the Decks, whilst
you rummidge the Hold.

But now we shall March where
the Diegos (though loath
To part with it civi'ly) may
soon oblige both.

They so much are scared from their
Wits with their dangers
That now they want wit to be
civil to strangers.

Come let us join hands then, and
never part asunder,
But, like the true Sons of trusty
old Mothers,
Make equally haste to a snap of
the plunder,
Then justly divide and spend it
like Brothers.

Bold ROUSE, doubting our safety by our stay;
Thinking his patience longer then our way;
And having well secured our Port,
Our Trenches dug, and raised our Fort,
Is here arrived, resolving still to be
A sharer in your worser destiny.
He was conducted by a SYMERON;
And bows for what his rasher Love has done.

I shall be very slow
When I must backward go,
With punishment to overtake
The errors which my friend did make.
Tell him I know his fault is past;
And now I cannot but go fast
When I shall forward move
To meet approaching Love.
The morn begins her glory in the East;
And now the world prepares
To entertain new cares;
Though the old sufficed to hinder all our rest.

Benighted Seamen now their Course reform
Who, Coasting, were misguided by a storm.
Now Merchants to imported stowage haste,
Whilst Plowmen drive from cottages their Teems.
The Poor in Cities rise to toil and fast;
And Lovers grieve to leave their pleasant Dreams.

Be careful not to let
The Camps Reveilie beat
To make our Warriors rise and move:
But as Heavens Traveller above
Unheard begins, and silently his way
Does still continue till he perfects Day,
So all this progress must be calmly made.
The winds, which still unseen
Have in their motion been,
Often pass without a whisper through the shade.

Each, dutious as your slave,
Does to your Orders grow;
And all, as in the Grave,
Are hushed and private now.

Ere we begin to march, send out
The SYMERONS again to scout:
Let not our Wings be loosely spread:
The Van I Will at some distance lead.
Those who the Baggage bear
Let PEDRO still relieve, and closse
Secure their Haltings in our Gross.
You shall command the Rere.

Arm, Arm! make haste, and bring me to my Chief!

What great distress does hasten for relief?

I come not now thy pardon to receive,
Because my rasher love without thy leave
Durst venture for a share
Of thy mishaps in War.

What wildeness more
Then I have seen before
In Deserts openly exposed,
Or Woods with ancient growth of shades enclosed,
Or Seas, when naught but lightning has appeared,
And only Thunder and the Winds were heard,
Does now thy wondering looks possess?

What more then yet thou can express?

DRAKE, thy beloved renown is lost,
Of which thy Nation used to boast:
Since now, where thou a sword do wear,
And many marks of power do bear,
The worst of license does best Laws invade:
For Beauty is an abject captive made;
Even whilst those flowery Ornaments are worn
Which should the Bridal dignity adorn.
If thus the crowd be suffered to deride
The sacred Rites and Honors of a Bride,
Let savage War devour all civil Peace,
Love fly from Courts to Camps, and Sexes cease.

Thy mystic meaning thou do less
By words then by thy looks express.

That we may better know
Thy thoughts, make haste to show
The object of our wonder, and thy fear.

Turn your unhappy eyes, and see it there.

What dismal Beauty does amaze my sight,
Which from black sorrow breaks like Morn from Night?
And though it sweetest Beauty be
Does seem more terrible to me
Then all the sudden and the various forms
Which Death does wear in Battles and in storms.

A party of your SYMERONS (whose eyes
Pierce through that darkness which does night disguise
Whom weary toyls might sleepy make,
But that revenge keeps them awake)
Did e're the early dawning rise,
And closse by VENTA-CRUZ surprise
A Bride and Bridegroom at their Nuptial Feast,
To whom the SYM'RONS now
Much more then fury show;
For they have all those cruelties expressed
That Spanish pride could e're provoke from them
Or Moorish Malice can revenge esteem.

Arm! Arm! the honor of my Nation turns
To shame, when an afflicted Beauty mourns.
Though here these cruel SYMERONS exceed
Our number, yet they are too few to bleed
When Honor must revengeful be
For this affront to Love and me.

Our Forces of the Land,
Brave Chief, let me command.

March on! whilst with my Seamen I advance;
Let none, before the Dice are cast, despair;
Nor after they are thrown, dislike the chance;
For Honor throws at all, and still plays fair.

In Beauties noble cause no Seaman doubt,
If Poets may authentic be.
For Sea-born VENUS sake let them march out:
She leads them both at Land and Sea.

Long yet ere night
I shall in fight
Their stormy courage prove:
Each Seaman has his Mermaid too;
And by instinct must love,
Though he were never taught to woo.

Stay! stay! successful Chief! my heart as low
As the foundation where thou tread'st does bow:
But it is not for my own offense;
For if I should offend
My King, in thee his friend,
I would not with my self dispense.
Thy mercy shall our pattern be,
Behold th'asflicted Bride is free.
She is as free and as unblemisht too
As if she had a Prisoner been to you.

What are they who disguised in nights dark shade,
Unlicens'd, from our Cap this sally made?
Strait to the stroke of Justice bring me those!

They thought their duties was to take their foes.
Be merciful, and censure the offense
To be, but their mistaken diligence.

Suspect not PEDRO in this crime, who still
Has shown exact obedience to thy Will.

And noble Chief, the cruelties which they
Have often felt beneath the Spaniards sway
(Who midst the tryumphs of our Nuptial feasts
Have forced our Brides, and slaughtered al our guests)
May some excuse even from your Reason draw:
Revenge does all the fetters break of Law.

The future guidance and the care
Of their demeanor in this war,
Is strictly, PEDRO, left to thee:
The gentle Sex must still be free.
No length of studied torments shall suffice
To punish all unmanly cruelties.
March on! they may ere night redeem
By virtuous Valor my esteem.

Ho! ho! the Prisoners straight unbinde,
And let the Bride all homage find;
The Father and the Bridegroom hither bring.
Ere yet our Van shall far advance,
Know Diegos you must dance.
Strike up, strike up! in honor of my King.

THe Reco is not yet within our Ken.

It will be strait. Draw up our men,
And in low whispers give our Orders out.

Where Is Pedro now?

Upon the brow
Of that high Hill, I sent him there to scout.

CHief, we are all into a Body drawn,
And now an hour is wasted since the dawn.

The time will yet suffice. We halted here
To stay for our tired Baggage in the Rear.

If ought from new resolves thou will command,
Speak, Chief, we now in expectation stand.

If English courage could at all be raised,
By being well persuaded, or much praised,
Speech were of use: but Valor born, not bred,
Cannot by Art (since being so,
It does as far as Nature go)
Be higher lifted, or be farther led.
All I would speak, should tell you, I despise
That treasure which I now would make your Prize:
Unworthy it is to be your chiefest aim.
For this attempt is not for Gold, but Fame;
Which is not got when we the Reco git,
But by subduing those who rescue it.

PEdro descends the Hill, and does desire
That from this open plain you would retire,
And wheel behind that Wood a little space.

Divide our Forces to secure the Pass.

THis must your station be;
Stand steadfast as that Tree!

Bravely alive upon this ground,
Or greater else in death be found.
The Bells of the Mules are heard from within.

Mules! Mules! I hear their walking chim, Ting, ting! --
They love sad Tunes, how dolfully they ring?

This sound seems single, and from far does come.
Would I were leading one rich Mule at home.

Still one and all I cry.

The rest are passing by.
Hark! hark! this mournful toleing does foretell
Some Diegos death, it is his passing Bell.

HEre Sym'ron, you must bold and watchful be.
Two Foes resist, but if oppressed by three,
Then strait fall back to that next Sentry there:
Or if in Gross The Enemy does appear,
Both to the third retirement make,
Till we th'Alarm, advancing, take.

Friend Pedro, friend! Is It one and all?

Speak softly, Sentry, do thou call?

How many golden Recoes did thou spy?

But two: in which I guess
By distant view, no less
Then ninety laden Mules are passing by,

What number is their Guard who march before?

Five hundred Foot, their Horse may seem threescore.

Friend of the Sea, their number is not small.

'T will serve our turn, they crying one and all!
But brother of the Land,
We now must understand
That Basta is the Word.

Would thou were safe aboard.

Asleep under Deck, and danced on a Billow,
With two Silver Wedges, each for my Pillow.

THat Volly was well fired,
Our out-Guards are retired.
Draw all our Sentries in!
The Skirmish does begin.

MOre Pikes! more Pikes! to reinforce
That Squadron, and repulse the Horse.

THe Foe does make his first bold countenance good.
Our Charge was bravely made, and well with-stood..

YOur Sym'rons, valiant Pedro, seem to reel.

Suspect your Rocks at Sea. They do bur wheel.
Haste! haste! brave Sym'rons, haste to gain that Bank,
And with your Arrows gall them in the Flank.

HOw warmly was this strife
Maintained 'twixt Death and Life,
Till Blood had quenched the flame of Valors fire?
Death seeming to advance in haste,
Whilst Life, though weary, yet stood fast;
For Life is still unwilling to retire.
My Land-men bravely fought,
And high renown have got,
For twice my Seamen they from death relieved.
As often my Seamen have
Preserved them form the grave,
And did requite the rescue they received.

THey fly! they fly! yet now they seem to face
All those who them pursue,
And would the Fight renew.

They fly, they fly!

Away, make good the Chase.

Follow, follow, follow!

THe Mules are ceis'd, and in our power remain.

Draw out new Guards, and range them in the Plain.
Those who hereafter on our Legend look,
And vallue us by that which we have took,
May over-reckon it, and us misprize.
Our dangerous course through storms and raging floods,
And painful march through unfrequented Woods.
Will make those wings by which our fame shall rise.
Your glory, valiant English, must be known,
When men shall read how you did dare
To sail so long, and march so far,
To tempt a strength much greater than your own.

And now by making our Retreat,
We shall new Wreaths and Statues get.

Our Course let us to victorious England steer!
Where, when our Sails shall on the Coast appear,
Those who from Rocks and Steeples spy
Our Streamers out, and Colors fly,
Will cause the Bells to ring,
Whilst cheerfully they sing
Our story, which shall their Example be,
And make Succession cry, To Sea, to Sea.


