LOVE'S LABYRINTH; OR, The Royal Shepherdess: A TRAGI-COMEDIE. By THO. FORDE,
Philothal

Quid Melius desidiosus agam?
Fata viam invenient.
Comica festina gaudet sermon Thalia.
LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham, and are to sold
at the Sign of the Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660

TRue Friend, while others me outvie, and grace the ^
(As thou do them far more) I scarce can trace thee
I many thousand miles do wander
Of Pilgrimage in thy Maeander,
Till by the golden thread,
Of Love I Am safe through led.
Thy Wit is far beyond the Serpentine;
Thy wreathings chequer-work and warp divine;
Thy curious inter-woven Plots,
Rich twine, ^y'd all in Lovers-knots:
Thy Skill is exquisite,
To untie and unite.
Thy Tent-works inlet pleases me so well,
I Would have none outlet: I Would rather dwell.
I love thy labyrinth, and approve,
That thou should labyrinth my love:
There I poor well-hous'd elf
Might safely lose my self.
I see, work-women a'n't above workmen*
How far short comes the needle of the pen!
Those Damsels, who are so devouts
In pricking little holes in clouts,
Thy lively Tapestry-story
Out-strips their painted glory*
Let spleen it self judge eithers manu tract:
Their female works cannot speak, thy male-words Act.
A drop of this your art (Sr.) passes
Beyond an Ocean of Lasses
Their by as-stitch does squint,
But thine's downright in print.
Nay all thou do would be such ne'retheless,
Though it never saw the light, nor felt the press.
Thy last impression comes behind,
The first and chief is in thy mind:
Thou art beyond the rest,
Thy first Edition's best.
None living can (I probably conjecture)
No not thy self) repair this Architecture.
Each line's right perpendicular,
Reason thy Pium, and Truth thy Square:
Each full-point may be sead,
A nail driven to the Head.
But I could wish there were no period,
That (though all is even) yet something still were od;
That after all Exits might begin
Still more fresh Intrats to come in.
The whole frame so divine is,
Naught vexes me but FINIS.
N. C.
WHo truly will thy Labyrinth commend,
Shall find it hard, both to begin, and end:
Yet thou have spun a thread, with which t'untwine
The wandering Lover, though all things combine
To stop his passage: Such a flowing Style
Thou usest too, as did my sense beguile:
For whilst I read, I neither Scaene nor Stage,
"Could think were feigned: I saw an Active Rage
"Appear in Damocles, which to my eye
"Not Acted seemed, but real Tyranny.
" Sephestia's love and doom; the better fate
"Of Pleusidippus, not more fortunate:
"For he Loves Labyrinth did also tread,
"And Court incestuously his Mothers Bed.
"And so her father, husband too (none known)
"Yet he by sympathy did claim his own,
"And had a grant, which moved the Tyrants spleen,
"(Since he could not enjoy her for his Queen)
"To kill them both; their destinies prevent,
"As loath to have destroyed the innocent.
"Yet at the last each thing succeeds with good:
"Though the foundation seemed t'be laid in blood.
"And then the harmless shepherds rural sport,
"Whose innocence makes every place a Court.
And all things in so consonanat a dress,
Makes more the seeming, not the being less.
That (credit me) there is not in it a line,
('It Is all so rare) but I could wish were mine.
And as before, so I say now of this,
Thou have thy skill by Metempsychosi^*
Proceed then Worthy Friend, and may thy Fame,
Like Laureat Johnson, ever speak thy Name.
Edw. Barwick*


The Scaene Arcadia*

CAn this be true?


My Liege, as truth it self.


And will neither the power of a King,
Nor precepts of a father over-sway
Her fond affections; but that thus she will
Run headlong to her ruin? Let her go.

Yet shot she not at rovers, but a Prince
He is, young and deserving; therefore since
Sh'has hit the mark, it will now be in vain
To give her aim, or make her shoot again.

Was she so hasty, that she could not stay
To take our Fatherly advice with her?
No wonder if she wander in the Labyrinth
Of love, without the clew of our counsel.

Come brother* come, she is not the first has done
A miss; her own affections were the surest guide
Unto her own content: she chose to please
Her self, not you, come, let this anger cease.

It Is now too late for to recall what is past,
The match is made, and that so surely fast,
It Is past dissolving now; a Grandfather
You are alreay: From their conjunction has
This in^^^ence proceeded, a fair boy
Has given them earnest of succeeding joy.

How! a boy! and shall that base brat enjoy
My crown? no, no, I Will take a course for that.

Why brother, it is a Prince by birth, and why
Not born to Reign?

Ay, mischief's on my head,
But I Will prevent the plot and storm, we will send
Them far enough* from troubling of our state:
Distance and danger shall they first subdue,
Before they gain our Crown; the slavish waves
Shall be their subjects: let them go and and win
The trydent of great Neptune, waters King.
I mean to set them forth.

What means my Liege?


Nay, I Am resolved, since that they do no more
Regard my favor, they shall feel my frowns.
O ye Celestial Deities! where are
Your power and wonted justice now become?
All things run headlong, and the feet forget
Their duty to their Head, and traitors turn,
Breaking the bonds of government; that now
A Princes power, or Fathers care's contemned,
And only recompensed with slight and scorn.

But* Sir, though she her duty do forget
To you, yet is she still your child, and may
Be easily reclaimed. Shall one misdeed
Forfeit all former loyalty? She used
To be more ready to give, than you
Could be to ask. Come, let the weight of that
O're-poize your anger, and this light offense.

I Will hear no more, all pity now is gone,
And anger has the castle of my breast
So strongly fortified, whole valleys of
Requests can never move: cease then your suit,
To which my ears are deaf, and tongue is mute.

Heaven is not so impregnable, but that
Entreaties may both siege and conquer it:
If that your daughter has run on the score
Of one offense, will nothing cancel it?

My resolution's writ in Adamant.


Dread Sir, and may not tears then blot it out?


Nor all the liquid drop the sea contains
Shall quench my rage; for now I have forgot
All pity of a father, and that wretch
Shall feel what it is to lose a fathers love. --
Since she will needs slight and contemn our care,
I Will have a Bark provided, without oar,
Or sail, or pilot, but the wilful wind,
And waves, true emblemes of their giddy act,
And therein with her brat, and mate imbarqu'd,
Shall seek their fortunes: And see you it done
Without delay, our Will admits no time,
T'expostulate no more than alteration*

O good my Lord command my service in
Some nobler act than this and do not try
My faith in that, for which ^'de rather die,
Than do it. What heir shall succ^ed your self
In the Arcadian Diadem, if thus you drown
The Sun of all our hopes, which must
Supply your place, when as your Sun shall set
In darkest clouds of death, must night ensue,
And seize upon our Horizon? -- O let
Some pity of our drooping state prevail.

All will not do. I Will have it done; then go
Or stay and pull my vengeance on thy head.
Will you turn traitor too, to our commands?
As you tender our favor, or your safety,
Go execute my will without delay.

And must my safety prove their ruin? can
They not live, but I must die? I Will do it.
Perhaps the tyrant-waves may prove more kind
Than is their King My Liege I Will ease your mind.

And must they, and they only prove (poor hearts)
A sacrifice to fury for their love?
I Will be companion of their fortune. We
Will leave this cursed land, which is naught else
But a dry sea of miseries, in which
We daily float; the sea can never be
More merciless. O what a maze of woe
Do lovers tread (dire fate) that for their love,
Are recompensed with hatred. Farewell world,
Thou ball of fortune banded to and fro,
And never quiet; we will try what fate
Awaits us in the sea, it cannot be worse
Than here we suffer by our dearest friends.

Well brother, since you are so weary of
The world, pray take your share with them, and care
Of her: I leave her unto you, and to
The mercies of the waves, and so adieu.

Was ever man so resolute to undo,
What an whole age cannot recompense again?
To cast away a Lady of that worth,
That bankrupt nature cannot furnish forth
Her Parallel: A beauty that would tempt
The gods to lust: But guarded with an eye
So modestly severe, it would strike dead
All lustful hopes of the hot ravisher.
See where she comes, like Phoebus newly rose
From Thetis bed: Little does she suppose
The cruelty of her once happy Father,
In having such a daughter, now no^ fit
To Enjoy a blessing which he values not.

What news my Lord? Is the ice of my fathers
Anger broken? Has the sun of counsel
Thawed his frozen breast?

Ay, into a flood --


What means this passion? Speak man, for I am
Prepared; it cannot be worse than I expect.

Why then it is --
Let me first drown my self
In mine own tears, and vent my mind in sighs:
Madam, you may guess sooner than I can tell.

Prithee torment me not thus with delays,
More tedious than the thing can be, what e're
It is. Come, I am armed with the shield
Of patience, my breast is mischief-proof.

It Is easier far to tell than execute:
I wish my task were done with telling it.
Madam, He has made me the sad Over-seer
Of that dire act, which he so fears to speak.
Silence will not relieve, it may protract
The doing of that horrid fact, which who
Shall hear, will loath the name of father, for
Your fathers sake, who when perhaps you are gone
By's want will prize your worth the more, and, love
You better than he ever did before.
Thus are we taught to value of the light,
By the dull silence of the darker night.

But to your story, and my doom, which sure
Must needs be great, that it can find no vent.
Come ease your shoulders of this burden, lay
It on mine, who have deserved it.

Lady, wonder not at our unwillingness
To tell what we had rather wish our tongues
Out, than to be the unhappy messengers
Of such sad news, the truth whereof must rob
Arcadia of it is richest, choicest Gem,
That does adorn her Princely Diadem:
By venturing all our hopes to the mercy
Of the cruel waves, He has pressed to be
Your only Pilot; being ship't alone,
With your dear babe and husband, without sail,
Or oar, to contradict the lawless seas,
In their unbounded raging tyranny:
Whose heedless rigor yet may hap to prove
More kind unto you than your fathers love.

Heavens will be done: But had another hand
Inflicted this, it would have lighter seemed: --
Yet is there comfort in his cruelty,
That has not parted me from him, for whom
All this will be but light; his company
Will sweeten all my sorrows, and convert
My mourning into mirth: Can I be sad,
Enjoying him will only make me glad?

I cannot win my brother to reverse
His cruel sentence, but it must be done. --
Dear Niece, I Am thy companion; misery
Shall never make my friendship to turn edge,
But at the lowest ebb of fortune shall
My love still flow: the sea shall never quench
That flame which virtue once has kindled in
My breast, nor shall it meet, or be put out
With any cold extinguisher but death.
If many shoulders make griefs burden light,
Then so shall ours: and may mine cease to be,
When they shall cease to bear their equal part,
And sympathize with thee, as does my heart.

Uncle, my thanks. How rare it is to find
A friend in misery! Men run from such,
Like Deer from him is hunted with the dogs,
As if that misery infectious were.
Men fly with Eagles wings away,
But creep like snails, when they should succor lend.
I cannot therefore choose but prize your love,
Who dare be true unto your friend; a name
Nearer than that of kindred, or of blood:
This is the effect of noblest virtue, which
Ties firmer knots than age can e're undo:
Such is the knot my Maximus and I
Have tied, spite of my fathers anger, it
Shall hold, when envy's tired to invent
Mischiefs, in vain, to cut the knot in two,
Which heaven has knit too fast to loose again.
Alas fond man! who thinks to unravel what
The gods have wove together. -- It Is in vain.

Lady, time calls upon you not to stay,
Lest by a fond delay you call upon
His fury to convert into some worse,
And sudden punishment, which may deny
All hopes of future safety; of all ills
The least is always wisely to be chosen.

Go and prepare that floting grave, which must
Devour's alive, I will attend you here.
Before when will my dearest find his grief,
In finding me thus lost without relief.
Why does my Love thus tarry? surely he
Forgotten has the place, or time, or else
He would not stay thus long; but can I blame
Him, to be slow to meet his ruin? I
Could wish he would not come at all, that so
He yet might live, although I perish; but
How fondly do I wish to be without
Him, without whom alas! I cannot live.
'Twere as impossible as without air:
He it is for whom I suffer, and with him,
All places are alike to me. -- See where
He comes, who is sole keeper of my heart.

My dear!


Ah, dear indeed, for whom thy life
Must pay the shot of cruelty enraged. --

What means my love? is it she, or do I dream?
Sure this cannot be she, whose words were wont
To be more sweet than honey, soft as oil:
These words, more sharp than daggers points, n^'re came
From her I know -- What say thou my sweet?

The same -- truth will not suffer me to speak
Other, lest I should injure her* -- O that
'Twere possible so to dispense with truth,
Not to betray our selves -- I know not what to say. --

Heavens bless us, what a sudden change is here!
Love, who has wronged thee? tell me, that I may
Third their lives upon my sword, and make their
Dead trunks float in their own blood, till they blush
At their own shame: Tell me my heart, who is it?

Alas poor soul! thou little dreamst what sad
News does await thine ears; my tongue does fail,
Not daring once to name the thing must be
Our loves sad end, and dire Catastrophe.
My fathers fury -- Oh that that name
I once delighted in, should odious be
To mine affrighted senses! -- But for thee
Alone, it is I grieve, not for my self. --

Be It what it will, so that it be but in
Relation to thy love, I will embrace,
And hug, and thank that malice too, that so
Invented has a means whereby I may
But testify my loyalty to thee:
For whose sweet sake I would encounter with
Legions of armed furies; sacrifice
My dearest blood unto thy service, which
I more esteem, than all the wealth the world
Can boast of: It Is thee alone I value,
Above whatever men's ambitious thoughts
Can fathom with their boundless appetites.

This flame of love must now be quenched in
T^^ foaming sea; we are designed a prey
Unto the fury of winds and waves. --
The deadly Barque's providing, which must be
Our moving habitation; the sea
Must be our Kingdom, and the scaly fry
Our subjects: -- This, this, the portion is
Of fortunes frowns, and fathers fiercer hate.
Fly, fly, my dearest Maximus, and save
My life in thine; oh stay no longer here.

Why do thou torment thy self before
Thy time? will thou anticipate the sea?
And drown thy self in ^ears? Deny me not
To share with thee in suffering, as well
As I have done in pleasure; it is for me
This storm is raised, were I once cast away,
His rage would cease. I, I have wronged thee,
And I Will be just to thee and to my word.
I Will open the sluices of my fullest veins,
And set them running, till they make a flood,
Wherein I Will drown my self --

Thine heart lies here;
It Is here, locked up securely in my breast:
First open that, and take it out; for death
Shall never divorce me from thy company:
I will attend thee through those shady vaults
Of death, or thou shall live with me. -- Do think
This body possible to live without
A soul? or without thee? Have pity on
Thy tender babe, whose life depends on thine,
And make not me widow, and him orphan,
With unadvised rashness -- Sheath thy sword.

Mine eyes will never endure it, to behold,
Thee miserable, no, no, death first shall draw
A sable veil of darkness over them -- --
Pardon my rashuess, I will live with thee,
And tire thy fathers rage with suffering,
So he will but suffer thee to live in mirth,
The greatest sorrow shall not make me sad.

Here comes my father, cerainly his rage
Will know no bounds: I fear it will
Break forth into some desperate act on me.

Although he be a King, which sacred name
I reverence, and as a mortal god
Adore; he shall not dare to injure you
Before my face: first shall he wear my life
Upon his sword, if he but dare to touch
Thy sacred self. -- --

How now light-skirts? have you got your Champion
To shield you from our anger? know I have
Not yet forgot the name of father, though
You thus have slighted it; but as a King,
We must be just to punish your contempt.
Did you so well know your beauty to be
Proud of it, and yet so little value it,
As thus to throw it all away at once?
Well, get you gone. -- Since that you have esteemed
A strangers love before your lovalty
To me, or my care to you, a stranger shall
Inherit what you were born to, had not
Your fond affections forced this vile exchange.

Sir -- for your fury will not suffer me
To call you father; think not your daughter
Undervalued by her love to me:
Her love ran not so low, as to be sto^p'd
To meet with crime, who am a Prince n^ less
Than is your self: Cyprus my Kingdom is.

What drew you hither then? you must needs know
It is no less than treason for to steal
An heir to our crown: what drew you hither?

Hither I came, drawn by that forcible
Attractive, for to offer up my self
A sacrifice at the altar of her love.
Tossed with a sea of miseries, I came
To anchor in the haven of her heart:
And if this be treason, I shall not blush
To be esteemed a traitor. But if not,
Then pardon me, if bolder innocence
Does force me tell you, it is not just in you
Thus to oppose what Heavens have decreed.
Believe me, Sir, it is neither safe nor just,
For you to violate the laws of fate.

Let not your pride so far transport you, that
You tax our justice. I shall scourge your haste th'wind
Into a leisurely repentance, when
The sea shall teach you that your tears, and
That sighs become your headlong rash attempts.

Great Sir, lay what you will on me, I scorn
To crave your favor for my self; but yet
Let Nature prompt you to be merciful
To her who is a chief part of your self.

No, as ye have joined your selves in mirth, so
Will I join ye too in mourning; and because
Two no good consort make, my brother shall
Bear a third part in your grave harmony.

Father, let me the heavy burden bear
Of this sad song alone: let all your fierce
Justice center in my breast. -- --

No more,
Our sentence is irrevocable, naught
Shall satisfy me else: I Will have it done.

My Liege, the barque is ready, and attends
Your pleasure; the commands of Kings are not
To be gainsaid, or broken; for the will
Of heaven is obeyed in doing them.

We do obey it then, and willingly,
Father, for yet I cannot forget that name,
Although these injuries would raze it out
My memory; I will not now dispute,
But readily obey your will: and know
The pleasures of your Court should not entice
Me shun this coming terror, which will be,
More welcome to me by my company.
And thus I take my leave. Here may you find
That happiness you wish, and we shall want
Whilst that we prove our selves loves Confessors,
If not his Martyrs. -- --

I will hear no more.
Away with them, my Lord, you know the place,
Our sentence and the time, I long to see
Me, and my Kingdom from these monsters free.

Arcadia adieu! Thou have before
Been famous for the happiness of loves:
Now mischief has usurped the seat, and may
It be the object of the gods hatred,
Since Love's the subject of their cruelty.
Come dearest, let us wind our selves so close,
That envy may admire, and so despair
To enter here, where love possession keeps.

Now shall I live secure, for now there is
None left, whose nearness to our blood might edge
Their hopes, by killing us to gain our Crown.
Kings lives are never safe from those that wish
Their ends, which must initiate them into
Th'enjoyment of a Kingdom; this same crown
Is such a bait unto ambitious spirits,
It Is never safe upon the wearers head.
Why weeps my dear?

Ask why I do not weep.
(Poor Artaxia) are my tears denied me!
Ask why I do not rave, tear my hair thus,
Why such a weight of sorrow does not rob
So much of woman from me, as complaints!
Or rather, why do I not cloud the sky
With sighs; till at the last with one bold stab
My own hand take from insulting fortune,
This miserable object of her sport.
Ask why I do not this, not why I weep!

Or stint thy tears, or mingle mine with them,
By a relation of their cause; these eyes
Trust me Artaxia, are not yet drawn dry,
Nor has strong sorrow e're exhausted them,
To make them bankrupt of a friendly tear,
But not a fond one. Why Artaxia!
Why do thou hasten those that come too fast,
Sorrow and age, clear up thy clouded brow.

Ah Damocles! how have thou lost thy self!
And art become a monster, not a man,
Thus to deprive me of my only joy,
The only stay and comfort of mine age,
Which now must fall. Break heart, and give
My sorrows vent. Ah! my Sephestia's gone,
For ever lost unto the world and me.

Content thy self, not I, but justice has
Deprived us of her: Justice, that is blind
To all relations, and deaf to entreats
Of fond nature, or fonder affection.

Ah cruel justice! Justice! no tyranny,
This is: Death, be my friend, and join once more
My dear Sephestia and me -- I come
Sephestia I come; cursed world farewell.

Help, help, Artaxia, my dear, help, help,
Sephestia does live, she is not dead.

Oh, it is too late -- oh-oh-oh --


Heavens! what a sight is here?
The Queen, she is dead, stark dead, what shall we do?
This wretched land is fruitful grown of late,
Of nothing else but miseries and wo^s*
Jove sends his darts like hail-shot, no place free:

Ah miserable man I am, a wretch,
Who thus have lost two jewels that the world
Cannot recompense: I know not what to do. --
Now could I tear my self in pieces, that I have
Thus parted friends, and left my self alone.
I am resolved, I will no longer live.

Stay, good my Liege, live, and repent of what
You Have done, you have killd enough already.

If I should kill my self, and lose my crown,
I were better live. -- Call us a Council quickly.
But my wife, my dearest Artaxia!
That I could breath life into thee again,
Or else were with thee!

He Is not yet so mad.


O ye powers above! what mean ye thus
To wrack us mortals with such blacker deeds
Than hell it self! or remove them, or take
All senses from us. Bear the body in,
And summon all our Lords with speed to attend
Upon us, that we may find out from whence
It is we suffer this sad influence.

Unhappy King! he has undone himself,
And all the Land. His sublimated rage
Has sown a crop of mischiefs, which no age
Can parallel; great-belly'd time is big
With sorrows; and our next succeeding times,
Must reap the harvest of his bloody crimes.

HOw mad a thing is Love? It makes us lose
Our senses; whilst we wander in a maze
O^ endless torments: sometime with his smiles
The cunning thief does flatter us with hopes
And tantalize our expectations, when
Strait our winged joys are gone, and we
Do wrack our selves with future coming fears:
A mistress frowns does cloud our clearer sky.

Fond love no more,
Will I adore
Thy feigned Deity.
Go throw thy darts,
At simple hearts,
And prove thy victory.
Whilst I do keep
My harmless sheep,
Love has no power on me:
It Is idle souls,
Which he controules,
The busy man is free.
Ah Menaphon, my Sister Pesana, a pies
On her, I had almost forgot her name, with come.
Thinking on her business.

Why what is thy business, Doron? tell me,


My business, it is none of my business, I tell you,
It Is my sister Pesana's business.

Well, what is her business then? I prithee tell.


Ah Sir! she is sick.


What is she sick of Doron? let me know.


Why* truly Sir, she is sick of you.


She sick of me? why, am I a disease?


I mean -- I mean -- she is sick for you.


That Is kindly done of her, Doron, that she
Will be sick for me: I Will make her amends.

Will you make her amend, said you? I am
Afraid you will make her end first; but truly
Menaphon I have a suit for you.

Have thou a suit for me? Is it a new one?


I say I have a suit to you.


To me? well, and what is your suit made of?


In good sooth, Sir, I must entreat you will
Love my sister as well as you have done.

No, Doron, love and I are fallen out, and he
Will not let me love thy sister or thee either.

No^ my sister, nor me neither. Out thou
Caterpiller, thou weasel, thou hedg-hog,
I will make you love me, and my sister too.

You are out of your suit now Doron, and
I fear you will catch cold, now you are hot.

Where am I now? Sure it is Arcadia.
A land happy in giving birth to my
Sephestia* Ah my Sephestia! --
But now no^ my Sephestia, since the waves
Have ravished her from me, and all my hopes
Are proved abortive; why do I now live!
Since she is gone, whose life and mine were both
Twisted on one thread! Ye fatal Sisters!
Why did not your cruel knife cut my life
In twain, when hers was broken off by the
Rude waves and blustering wind, who strove which should
Gain her from each? But both from me have robbed
Her*^ now may the sea well boast, and outvie
The beggered earth; since it has her who was
The earth's whole sum of riches. O ye gods ^
Why did ye once make me so happy
To enjoy her, and now snatched her again
To make me thereby the more miserable?
Yet is she not quite drowned; for her heart
Is here: it is mine the sea does prey upon.
Well, my Sephestia, oh that name does ravish
Me: This body shall a monument be,
And my whole life a continued Elegy,
Both consecrated to thy memory.
I Will drown thee once more in my tears,
Which I will daily pay, as tribute to thee.
Cyprus adieu, greatness also farewell.
I see, those who are lifted highest on
The hill of honor, are nearest to the
Blasts of envious fortune, whilst the low
And valley fortunes are far more secure.
Humble valleys thrive with their bosoms full
Of flowers, when hills melt with lightning, and rough
Anger of the clouds. I will retire from
The front of honor, to the rear of a
Shepherds life: where whilst I do daily tend
The harmless sheep, will I sing forth sad notes
Of their blessed happiness, and my misfortune.
I will no longer keep this miserable name
Of Maximus* but clad in sorrows weeds,
Will I wear the name of Melecertus.
No more Maximus Prince of Cyprus, but
A poor shepherd will I be: when you see
Those weeds, and hear Melecertus name,
I am that wretched he, who, like the snake,
Have cast my former coat by creeping through
The hole of misery, and got a new.

My Carmela is coming, and I Am provided to cast
A sheeps eye at her.

Now I see how Love came blind, he flung
His eyes at me in stead of a love-dart.

Ha, my Carmela, let me kiss thy honysuckle lips*


You kiss so hard, you will leave your beard behind.


By my troth, Carmela, swains cannot swear,
But -- I do love thee -- by our great god Pan
I love thee.

You said you could not swear, and yet you Swear you love me.


Love, I have stared so long at thee, that I Am now grown blind.


Then shall you be led, like blind beggars
With a dog and a bell, or else be beholding
To the glasier for a new pair of eyes.

I know not what you mean eyes, but I am
Sure that I am off the hooks. You tell me of
Eyes, eyes, but it is your no's that torments me.
This blind god, that the Poets call Cupid, has seen
To hit me with his dart, I know not how,
But as the blind man killed the crow.

Then you are one of the wanderers in Loves
Labyrinth, I prithee let me lead thee.

Ay, so we may both fall; but no matter,
For if you fall first, I Will fall on thee.

Fie, Doron, fie, are you not ashamed?


Ashamed? of what? marry better falling
Falling out.

You Are very merry Doron, where is your in, than music?


Let me play on thee, my pretty bag-pipe,
And I know thou will sing, loath to depart. --

And I Will try that, now follow me.


Nay, when you came to the snuff once, I thought
You would quickly go out.

Oh Menaphon, hark, I am undone, as a man
Should undo an oyster.
Why Doron, what is to do with thee now*


Why man, thy sister Carmela is grown
proud,
And is just such another as thy self, she slights
And scorns poor Doron; and yet because I love
her*
As my sister does thee, she laughs at me. Well,
I will be even with her* for if she will not love
Me with a good will* I Will love her against her
Will; and I think I shall be even with her there*

Come, Doron, come, count love a toy,
As I do, who take far more joy to view
My flocks; here is my content; when heavens frown,
I think upon my faults; and a clear sky
Puts me in mind of the gods gracious love:
Envy o're-looketh me, nor do I gaze
So high as tall ambition; and for love,
I feed my self with fancies, such as these.
Venus (the Poets say) sprang from the sea,
Which notes to me the inconstancy of love,
Changing each day with various ebbs and tides*
Sometimes o're-flowing the banks of fortune
With a gracious look from a lovers eyes,
Ebbing at other times to the dangerous shelf
Of cold despair, from a Mistress frowns.
Your Cupid must be young* to show
He is a boy, his wings inconstance tell*
He Is blind, to note his aim is without rule,
Or reasons guide; such is the god ye serve.

Treason, treason against the god of love*
Menaphon, though you be my friend, I will
Have you articl'd against at the next meeting well
Of the Shepherds.

Lovers sorrows be like to the restless
Labors of Sisyphus.

Like thy tongue then.


Your Mistress favour's honey mixed with gall
A bitter sweet, a folly worst of all,
That forces reason to be fancies thrall.
Then love who list for me, if beauty be
So sour, then give me labor still.

How I would laugh to see Menaphon once
Manacl'd with loves fetters, that he might repent
His blasphemy against the shepherds deity.

Ah cruel fortune, but more cruel father,
Most wretched I, who thus am robbed of all
My pregnant hopes, my springing joys blasted
With winter frowns. Jove send a flaming dart
Into my breast, to melt my frozen heart
Into a flood of tears, that I may drown
My self in them* since that the waves have proved
Unkindly courteous to preserve my life,
But to prolong my misery, and he
Is drowned who was my life's preserver.
Ah ye enraged deities! could ye
Be so unkind to draw my life's thread out
Thus long, to survive him who was my life?
Why did ye not, or save his life with mine,
Or destroy mine with his, that so I might
Enjoy his company in life or death?

Ay, in the gods time, Niece, but not before.


And oh* my dearest Plusidippus! could
The waves be so hard-hearted, as to crop
Thy blooming youth, to send thee to thy grave
Before thou were a man? Had they but left
Me thee, it would have eased thy fathers loss,
If I had had his transcript to have viewed
In thee, who were his perfect Image. Now
In stead of heir to the Cyprus crown,
The cypress grove shall be Joynter, where
I Will sadly spend the remnant of my life,
To weep my losses, and my own sad fate,
Which thus I will revenge; my Maximus
Shall live still fresh within my memory,
There fixed too sure for all the briny waves
To wash away. Nor shall I e're forget
My son, my Plusidippus. I could feed,
My self unto eternity with these
Sweet names, which do as far outvie
The Nectar and Ambrosia of the gods,
As pearls do pebbles. I can hold no more*
My heart's so full, 'twill break, or overrun
The sluices of mine eyes. -- ^'ll weep the rest.

Why do thou thus torment thy self in vain?
Thy tears will not recover them again.
Fates dart is shot, and cannot be recalled,
Nor is there any salve for fortunes wounds,
But patience; therefore seeing me
Partaker of thy sorrows, now lean all
Thy cares on me, it is some relief,
In sorrow to have fellows of our grief.

My husband and my son are gone, and I
Survive alone un^o their misery.

Chance is like Janus, double-fac'd; sometimes
With smiles she comforts us, sometimes
With frowns she casts us down again: A calm
Succeeds a storm, and a sharp winter does
Precede a pleasant spring.

Often turnings tire
The weary traveller; and love does lose
His followers, in a wild Labyrinth
Of woes. How am I fallen from all my hopes!
(An exile in my native Country:) and
The crown hope seemed to place upon my head:
Banished from the pleasures of the Court,
Parted for love from him I could not choose
But love, from Maximus, who has for me
Suffered as many mischiefs as malice
Could invent, and now all sum'd up in death.

What of all this? after the storm that rent
Our ship, we found a calm that brought us safe
To the shore, whilst Neptunes mercy was beyond
The envious blasts of Aeolus; and thus
The gods do recompense us with their favor,
For the dis-courtesies of your father.

Sweet Lamedon, once partner of my joys,
Though now partaker of my wants; I see
You are as constant in my sad distress,
As you were faithful in my richer fortunes:
Though friends seldom prove friends in poverty
Misfortune has not changed your mind, but you
Temper my exile with your banishment:
Your aged years shall be my sole directors,
Your will the ruler of my actions.
If you persuade me to content, Portia
Shall not exceed Sephestia's patience:
If you will have me strike my sails, I will,
And steer my course by th'compass of your care.

Since hope is all the portion we have left,
Let Us thank the gods that saved our lives, and rest
Our cares on them, they can return us more
Than we have lost, or fit our minds to bear
Our present state. Contentment gives a crown,
Where fortune has denied it: patience
Makes all things easy to an humble mind.
Cares are companions of the Crown, the Court
Is full of busy thoughts, and envious strife,
Whilst peaceful sleeps attend a Country life.

Then Lamedon will I disguise my self,
And with my clothes will change my former thoughts,
Measure my actions by my present state,
Not by my former fortunes. Sephestia
No more: Alas! I know not where, or how
We shall bestow our selves: Surely this is
Some un-frequented place, no harmless sheep
Do feed, nor shepherds tend their thriving flocks.

Heavens! what a sight is here! Such stars appear
But rarely in our Country Hemisphere,
I am so Planet-struck with one short glance,
I neither can retire nor yet advance.
What resolution is of proof against
Such charms as these! Some goddess has assumed
An humane shape to tempt us weaker mortals.
Cupid, I cry thee mercy now, although
I were an Atheist unto thee before,
Thou art the Deity I will adore.*
Sure they are in distress, those pearly tears
Furrow her cheeks with cruel strife
Which shall run fastest, are no sooner dried,
New sighs, like the warm southern wind proclaim
A fresh approaching shower. I fear they are
Some passengers late shipwrack't, for I saw,
(When walking by the shore) some floting parts
Of a torn ship, contending with the waves.

Courteous shepherd, if distressed persons
Fortune has robbed, and the sea favored
(If it be a favor to live and want)
May crave your aid so far, as to direct
Us to some place may rest our wearied bones,
Our charges shall be paid, and you shall have
For recompense, such blessings as the gods
Use to bestow on hospitable men.

Strangers, your quality I know not, nor
Shall now dispute; but if a country cell
May not too disparage you, here is
Hard by my cottage, and your home.

Kind Sir, your courtesy is much beyond
Our merit, and our present hopes below
A suitable return; please you accept
Our thanks, as earnest of that larger debt
Future ability may see discharged.

Lady, I have no curious hangings to
Adorn my walls, nor plate to show my wealth:
Yet do I live content; and you shall find
Such welcome as a cottage can afford.

Sir, blame not our wills, but present want, which now
Makes us thus plentiful only in thanks.

Carmela, by my great bel-weather, Carmela,
I Am over the tops of my high-shooes in love,
And there shall I stick and starve, if thou do
Not pull me out. -- Where have thou been
This live-long hour?

What, does the mouth of your affections water?


Water? No, it fires. I Am so all a-fire, that I dare
Not go amongst my flocks for fear, lest
I should burn up all their pasture, if thou
Do not shower down some dew of
Comfort to cool me.

I shall soon cool your courage* Doron; for
I cannot, may not, will not love thee.

Out you gossip, not love me? go, get
You spin on Ixions wheel.

No, Lovers spin on that, and so must you.


How fond was I, when I as vainly strove
To keep my heart against the god of Love!
I little thought his power; when I resolved
To live, and not to love: Nature I see
Cannot subsist without loves harmony.
In vain I shut the door, and bolted it
With resolution; strait the thief,
Thorough the casements of mine eyes got in,
And stole away my heart; as once of old
He served the merry Greek Anacreon;
Whose fancy fits my fortune: Here it is*
Cupid all his Arts did prove,
To invite my heart to love;
But I always did delay,
His mild summons to obey;
Being deaf to all his charms.
Strait the god assumes his Ar^^.
With his how and quiver, he
Takes the field to Duel me.
Armed like Achilles, I,
With my shield alone defy
His bold challenge, as he cast
His golden darts, I as fast
Caught his Arrows in my shield,
Till I made him leave the field.
Fretting, and disarmed then,
The angry god returns again,
All in flames; *stead of a dart,
Throws himself into my heart.
Useless, I my shield require,
When the Fort is all on fire.
I in v^^^ the field did win,
Now the Enemy's within.
Thus betrayed, at last I cry,
Love thou have the victory.
Alas! what heart's so fortified, to prove
The several batteries of the god of love!
What ear's not charmed with th'rethorick of a voice,
Whose single note would silence all the Quire
Of the Aerial feathered Choristers!
What eye would not be blinded to behold
Those eyes which cast a cloud upon the Sun,
And bring his light under disparagement.
Witness that face, whose Shrine has made me blind.
How fares my fairest guest?

The better for
Your courteous entertainment, may the gods
Be favorable to your flocks, as you
Have friendly been to us.

May I presume
To crave your name, and to enquire how
Hard-hearted fortune could be so unjust,
To injure innocence? Sign she is blind.

My name is Samela, my parentage
But mean, the wife of a poor Gentleman
Of Cyprus, now deceased: How arrived here*
Pray do not now enquire; time may reveal,
What present sorrows force me to conceal.

I will not press your yet fresh bleeding wounds,
With a rude hand; it is time and patience
Must work the cure; the gods allow a salve
For every sore, but we must wait on them:
Their time is best; for when we strive to heal
Our wounds too fast, they do but fester more.
Rest here content; a Country life is safe,
Fortune o're-looks our humble cottages
We are not pained with wealth, nor pined with want,
Our sheep do yield us milk for food, and wool
To make us clothes; hunger and cold we slight:
Envy has here no place, we will friendship keep,
Free from all jars, and harmless as our sheep.

O happy life! would I had never known
Other than this, which by comparison,
Renders mine odious to my memory.

Sorrow sits heavy on her heart, but shows
More lovely in her face; those tears appear
Like crystal dew upon the blushing rose.
Beauty thus veiled, is more inviting, than
Shining out in it is unclouded splendour.
Fortune, I hate thee, for thy spite to her,
But thank thee for thy courtesy to me,
In sending her for shelter to my house.
Kind love assist me now, and I will be
Her constant servant, and thy votarie.

THis present to the King of Thessaly
Will gain us both reward and pardon too
For all our former Pyracies upon
His seas and ships.

Ay, he has never a son,
For to inherit the Thessalian Crown:
Hereby this lad may gain a Kingdom, whilst
We seek but our liberties and lives,
For time to come, and pardon for what is past.
This is the place the King does often frequent,
When public cares oppress his Royal head,
Here he unloads the burden of his thoughts,
And changes cares for recreation. --
See where he comes! God save your Majesty.

Long live Agenor, King of Thessaly.


What means this bold intrusion? who are ye?
That dare presume into our private walks?

Pardon, great Sir, we come not to offend
Your sacred Majesty, but to present
You with this living gift.

This is a gift
Indeed; where had ye him, or what is his birth?

Please you, dread Sir, grant us your pardon then,
We shall declare unto you what we know.

Take it, we freely pardon ye. Now speak.


Then be it known unto your Majesty,
We the two famous Pirates are, you have
So long laid wait to take, but all in vain.
Roving upon the coasts of Arcady,
We found this beauteous youth upon the shore,
Whom (we suppose) the seas had wrack't, but saved
His life, which we have nourished ever since,
And now bequeath unto your Majesty:
For which we beg no recompense, but this,
To seal our pardons for our former faults.

Look that for time to come ye honest be,
And for what is past we freely pardon ye.

Thanks, Royal Sir, the remnant of our lives
Will we spend in your service, and so give
Again, our lives which you have given us,
When they were forfeit to your laws and you.

This is a welcome gift. What a divine
Beauty does sparkle in his countenance!
Surely he cannot be of mortal race
Descended, but Jove himself has sent him,
To be the happy heir of my Kingdom.
Immortal Jove! I thank thee for this gift.
Thou could not have sent a welcomer.
My pretty lad, where were thou born? can tell?

I know not, Sir, -- my name is Plusidippus.


Come, follow me, now have I found at once
An husband for my daughter, and an heir
For the Thessalian Crown. Thrones are supplied forth,
By Jove, who, when the root is withered,
Can make more heavenly branches to sprout
Which may in time grow mighty trees to shade,
And shelter all their liege-subjects under.

Strike home, great Cupid, with thy flaming dart,
As yet thou do but dally with my heart:
It Is rather scratched than wounded; I do hate
A lukewarm love: give me a love flames high,
As it would reach the element of fire,
From whence it came; a low and creeping flame
Befits ^ chimney, not a lovers breast.
Give me a love dare undertake a task
Would fright an Hercules into an ague.
A love dare tempt the boldest fate, and die
An honored captive, or bold conqueror.
Give me a daring, not a whining love,
A love grows great with opposition:
A love that scorns an easy task, things great
And noble always are most difficult*
This is the love (blind Cupid) I would have,
A love that brings home trophies, or a grave.
I Will tempt his god-ship with a song, and see
If verse, not sighs, will gain the victory.
No more, no more,
Fond Love give ^'re,
Dally no more with me;
Strike home and bold,
Be hot, or cold,
Or leave thy deity.
In love, lukewarm,
Will do more harm,
Than can fevers heat:
Cold cannot kill
So soon as will
A fainting, dying sweat.
I cannot tell,
When sick, or well,
Physic, or poison give;
Still in anguish,
I do languish,
Or let me die, or live.
If I must be,
Thy Votarie,
Be thou my friend or foe:
If thou will have
Me be thy slave,
Hold fast, or let me go.
Sure Cupid has resigned his place, and given
His godhead unto Carmela, whose eyes
Wound more than ever did his darts.
But what is that, if she have power to hurt,
And wants mercy for to heal those hurts.
I fear whilst I make her my deity,
I do but thereby make her proud,
And with my own hands place her out of reach.
Yet she is in distress, and that should make
Her humble: I relieve her, therefore she
Has the more reason thus to relieve me;
And certain, she will rather love than want.
Ha ha, ha, etc. are you caught, Menaphon?
In Faith, I think you are fettered now, you are hanged
In The brambles of love, as well as I. You laughed
At me before, but now I Will laugh at you.

Ah Doron! now I crave thy pity, for
I never thought an earthly beauty could
So soon have fettered me; what did I say?
An earthly? No, Doron, she is heavenly,
Brighter than Phoebus in his glittring pride:
Venus her self was not so fair a Bride.

How now Menaphon! I Am afraid thou will
Be a beggar shortly, thou art a Poet already.
One of the threadbare crew, that ragged regiment.

See Doron, see, see where she comes, who with
Her brighter luster can create a day
At midnight, when the Sun is gone to sleep;
Eclipse his noontide glory with her light:
Her absence would benight the world* and cloath't
In blackest darkness, for to mourn it is loss.

Good Morrow Host, how thrive your well-fed flocks?


My flocks do thrive (Lady) and cannot do less,
Blessed with the auspicious sunshine of your eyes;
And I were too ungrateful, if I should
Deny to give you back again, what I
Enjoy but by your beauteous influence.

You Are merry, Menaphon, if not profane,
To rob the gods of what is due to them,
To give it to the object of their scorn.
Could I dispense good fortunes, I should not
Forget my self, and choose the meanest lot.

This it is to be in love, how spruce is
Become of late, as he were always going
To a feast? and talks as if he were some
City Orator. Why can I not do so? I Am
Sure I am in love as well as he. But
I Will go hire some journey-man Poet, or other,
And he shall make me some verses
For my Carmela: And that will do as
Well, as if I made them my self; I Will
Set my brand upon them, and then no
Body will question them to be mine, no
More than they do my sheep that are marked.

Ay, ay, it shall be so. Oh Melecertus,
Yonder is the finest shepherdess that ever
The moon held the candle of her light to; the
Shepherd Menaphon has got her to him, as
If because he is the Kings shepherd, he
Must have the Queen of Shepherdesses.
Have seen her, Doron? and do know her name?


Seen her? ay, and sigh to see her too; her name, I
Think, is Stamela -- no, no, -- Samela, Samela,
Ay, ay, that is her name, I have it now, I would
I had her too.

What kind of woman is she, can thou tell?


Ay, or else I were naught to keep sheep.


Can thy tongue paint her forth to mine ^ar?


Ay, ay, legible, I warrant you.
Her eyes are like two diamonds, I think, for
I never saw any before; and her locks are
All gold, like the golden fleece our shepherds
Tell of.

It were good vent'ring for that golden fleece,
Doron, as Jason long since did for his.

Her hands are all ivory, like the bone-haft
Of my best knife, her alablaster, and her
Eyes black as my blackest lamb, her cheeks
Like roses red and white that grow together.
What think you of her now? have I not made
A fair picture on her?

Ay Doron, were this picture painted to
The life, as thou have here described it,
It could not choose but make an absolute,
Rare, and complete piece of deformity.

Nay, nay, if you don't like it, I don't
Care, but I had it out of an old book of
My brother Mor^^'s, they call 'm
Rogue-mances, I think: my brother
Has a whole tumbrel full on 'm, he is
Such a Bookish block-head --

Nay, be not angry, Doron, I believe
Thou mean a beauty beyond expression*
And such an one I had, till envious fate
Robbed me of her, and all my joys at once,
Heavens envying at my happiness,
Sent death to fetch her from me, and she is dead,
Dead, Doron, dead, -- she is dead to me, and to
The world, and all but to my memory.

Fie, Melecertus, what do mean to
Weep? what, will thou make dirt of
Her ashes with thy tears?

Well, Doron, we forget our flocks, and we
Shall miss the shepherds merry meeting.

That Is true, and there will be the shepherdesses
Too, and Menaphon will bring his fine
Mistress thither; there shall thou see her,
But first mask thine eyes, lest thou lose
Them, and become love-blind, as I am.
Good Melecertus take the pains to lead me.

How wretched am I grown, I hate my self,
And care not now for my own company:
I loath thee light, and fain would hide my self
From mine own eyes; I Am weary of my life. --
Where shall I hide my self, that there I may*
Deceive th'approaches of discov'ring day?
I Will seek some gloomy cave, where I may lie,
Entombed alive in shades of secrecy.

His thoughts are much perplex't, and black despair,
May push him on unto some desperate act,
If not prevented by our vigilance.

This is the effect of rash resolves, when have
And passion hurry men to do those things
Reason would wish undone, at least delayed.
Our wills spurred on by rage, never stop, till we
(Blinded with anger) headlong throw our selves
From dangers praecipice, into a gulf
Of black despairing thoughts; and then too late
Repentance lends us so much light as may
Show us our madness, and our misery.

Ill actions never go unpunished;
They are their own tormentors, and do prove
At last, furies to lash the guilty soul.

When reason is deposed, and passion reigns,
Nothing but lawless actions do appear:
When passion has usurped the helm,
And steers a wild uncertain course, not by
The card and compass of advice, the ship
Will never make good voyage, but be tossed
Upon the waves, and all her lading lost.
He by his wilful rage has cast away
Himself, and floats upon the waves of ruin:
Let Us try if we can waft him safe to shore,
Lend him our helping hands, lest he do sink
Into that deep and black gulf of despair.

Let Us after him, and try what we can do,
In saving him, we save our Kingdom too.

Hey day, what is here, my brother Doron?


Doron conceits himself that he is blind.


Ay, Doron's as blind as any door: what
Creep I here upon? Carmila, oh Carmila,
The very sight of thee has recovered mine
Eyes again.

Nay, now I see,
Doron, thou art blind indeed,
That do not know Carmila from her clothes.
No, no, it is Samela, not Carmila.

Which is my Carmila? good Melecertus.
Show me where she is.

It seems, Doron, Carmila is not here.


Why, what do I do here then? I thought
It was something I missed, only I
Mistook; for I had thought it had
Been my eyes were lost, but now I
See it is my Carmila is missing, whom
I had rather see than my own eyes.

This is my corrival in Menaphon's love.


She is a beauty indeed; and since my
Sephestia is drowned, without compare.
I cannot blame Menaphon, but envy
Him rather, for his so happy choice.
O happy! yet to me unhappy beauty!
That does (as in a glass) present unto
My frighted senses the remembrance of
My loss, which, unless by this fair piece,
Cannot be recompensed by the world. --
Mistress, you are welcome to our company.

By my troth, Mistress, you are very welcome,
As I may say, unto our meeting.

Thanks shepherds: I am a bold intruder
Into your company; but that I am
Brought by your friend, and my host Menaphon.

Mistress, your presence is Apology
Sufficient; yet do we owe him thanks,
That by his means we have the happiness
To Enjoy your sweet society in this
Our rural meeting, when shepherds use
To cheer themselves with mirth and pleasant tales.

I hope my company shall not forbid
The Banes between your meeting and your mirth.

Then by your leave, fair shepherdess, I will
Begin with you. If the gods should decree
To change your form, what shape would you desire?

I would be careful how to sail between
The two rocks, of immodest boldness, or
Of peevish coyness; therefore to answer
Unto your question, I would be a sheep.

A sheep? Mistress, why would you be a sheep?


Because that then my life should harmless be,
My food the pleasant Plains of Arcadie,
My drink the curious streams, my walks
Spacious, and my thoughts as free as innocent.

I would I were your Keeper.


But many times the fairest sheep are drawn
Soonest unto the shambles to be killed.

And sure a sheep would not repine at that,
To feed them then, who fed her long before.

Then there is more love in beasts, than constancy
In men, for they will die for love, but when?
When they can live no longer, not before.

If they are so wise, it is their mother-wit,
For men have their inconstancies but from
You women, as the sea it is ebbs and tides
Has from the moon. -- Your emblem to an hair.

Menaphon, if you hate my sister, I Will --
Love yours for it in spite of your teeth*

Your mother surely was a weather* cock,
That brought forth such a changeling; for your love
Is like the lightning, vanished as soon
As it appears; a minute is an age
In your affections. You once loved me* --

Ay, I would you loved him no better.


If that I be so changing in my love,
It is because mine eye's so weak a Judge,
It cannot please my heart upon trial.

If that your eye's so weak, then let your ears
Be open to your loves appeals and plaints,

Come, for to end this strife, pray let us hear
The opinion of good Doren, who is so mute,
As if h' had lost his tongue too, with his eyes.

By my ^ay, fair Mistress, I was thinking
All this while with my self, whether in being
A sheep, you would be a ram, or an ewe?

An ewe, no doubt; if I should change my, shape
I would not change my Sex; and horns are held
The heaviest burden that the head can bear.

I think then I were best be an ewe too,
So I might be sure to have no horns:
But I would not greatly care to wear horns,
Were I a ram, were it but where you were and gives
An ewe. --

Well, shepherds, come, the day declines,
Us timely warning for to fold our flocks.

Were my Sephestia living, I should think
This sheperdess were she: Such was her shape,
Such was her countenance; her very voice
Does speak her my Sephestia. But alas!
How fondly do I dream! I do embrace
A cloud in stead of Juno. Yet I love,
And like her, 'cause she is so like my Love.
We love the pictures of our absent friends:
And she is the living picture of my dear,
My dear Sephestia. Me thinks I feel
A kind of sympathy within my breast*
To like and love her of all women best.
Forgive me, my Sephestia, if thou live,
If I do love another for thy sake:
Thy likeness is the loadstone which does draw
My heart to her, that nothing else could move.
Thou most impartial deity of Love!
Can there be two Suns in Loves Hemisphere?
Or more loves in one heart than one that is true*
Or can the stream of true love run in more
Channels than one? Shall I be thus paid
For my love to false Menaphon? Hereafter,
Venus, never will I adore thee, nor
Will I offer up so many Evening
Prayers unto Cupid, as I have done. --
Was ever poor maid so rewarded with
An inconstant lover, as I daily am
With this same fickle-headed Menaphon!
How now Pesana! what is the news with thee?
News! marry it is the news I complain of;
Were Menaphon the old Menaphon, that
He was wont to be, I should not complain*

Come -- plain Pesana must not grutch to give
Way unto fine Samela* that has turned his*
Heart, and if he do not turn again
Quickly, he will be burnt on that side; well,
Be content a while, by that time he has loved
Her, as long as he did thee, he will be as
Weary of her, as he is now of thee.

But in the mean time* Doron, I must be
A stale to her usurps my right in him.

Ay, that is the reason he does not care
For thee, because thou art stale.
Thus do poor lovers run through
The briars and the brambles of difficulties,
And sometimes fall into the ditch of undoing.

Good Doren, be my friend to Menaphon.
And mind him of his former love to me,
Or I shall learn at last to slight him too.

Ay, ay, he has a sister, just such another
As himself, I Am zure she has even broken
My poor heart in twain; and if it be
Piec'd again, it will never be handsome.

How happy are these shepherds! here they live
Content, and know no other cares, but how
To tend their flocks, and please their Mistress best.
They know no strife, but that of love, they spend
Their days in mirth; and when they end, sweet sleeps
Repay, and ease the labors of the day*
They need no Lawyers to decide their jars,
Good herbs, and wholesome diet, is to them
The only Aesculapius; their skill
Is how to save, not how with art to kill.
Pride and ambition are such strangers here,
They are not known so much as by their names*
Their sheep and they contend in innocence,
Which shall excel, the Master or his flocks.
With honest mirth, and merry tales, they pass
Their time, and sweeten all their cares:
Whilst Courts are filled with waking thoughtful strife,
Peace and content do crown the shepherds life.
DAughter, it is enough, we will it, see
You show your duty in obeying us;
Since I have made choice of him for my Son,
Accept him for your husband: He Is a man
Ancient in virtues, although young in years:
He Is one whose worth is far beyond his age.

Father, it grieves me that the cross Fates have
Forced me to hate the man you so much love*
Cupid has struck me with his leaden dart,
I cannot force my own affections.

How Is this? you hate him whom I love! can he
Be the object of your hate, who is alone
The subject of my love and reverence?
He whom the gods in mercy have designed
The happy Successor unto my crown,
And to your love? Bethink your self again.

Great Sir, the gods themselves are subject to
That little deity of love* can I
Withstand his power, or love against his will?
Force cannot work on love, which must be free,
And uncompell'd, else can it not be true,
Nor lasting. Sir, urge me no more in vain.

What a strange change is here! Your will was wont
Freely to stoop to all my just desires;
Is it now grown so stiff* 'twill not be bent
By my commands? I know thou do but feign.

I would obey your will, could I command Mine own affections, or choose my love.


Do it, or else by Jove, whom I present*
*ll punish thy neglect. -- I cannot think
Thy words and thoughts agree. Surely to love,
Is natural, why then not to love him,
Whom nature made to be beloved? He has
Artillery enough about him to take in
The stoutest heart at the first summons. -- Well,
Think on it Euriphila, when I am gone,
I Will leave thee here, Lovers are best alone.

How rarely have I played this part, and hid
My love under a mask of hate! -- but now,
Me thinks, I feel the fi^e of love to rage
More fiercely in my breast; for being kept
So close, it will break out too soon: I must
Invert the course of love, and woo him first.
He comes, and fitly: Cupid, instruct me now,
To war and conquer in this bloodless fight,
That wins the field by flight, and not by force.
Yet must I veil my love still, and seem coy,
Till by a false retreat I make him fall
Into those snares I set, and wish him in. --
What means this bold intrusion? do befit*
You to intrude into my privacies?

Lady, the fault's not mine, fortune has led
Me to this place: mine ignorance (I hope)
Will plead mine innocence. As I have found
Your Royal Fathers noble favors far
Exceed my hopes, or my requital, let
Not your frowns strike dead whom he has raised
To life; cruelty cannot lodge within
That tender breast was only made for Love.

Dare you presume to talk of love to me?
Am I a mate* fit for your choice? Be gone,
And seek some shrub may fit your lowness best.

Madam, this storm becomes you not. It is
Degenerate from your noble Fathers strain.
I cannot think this should proceed from one,
That is the Heir to his name and worth.

My fathers ears shall ring with this, that he
Has warmed a viper, which would bite him now,
And entertained a guest would rob his host.

Lady, my spirit tells me that my birth
Is not so base as you conceit. I mean
To try my spirit, and my fortunes in
Mars his Camp, but not in Venus Courts.
Since nature's so unkind, as not to let
Me know* what honor I was born unto,
I Will win some to my name, by actions, which
Shall speak me noble; I had thought to have made
You the fair goddess at whose shrine I meant
To Have offered up, and sacrificed my self,
And all my services; but cause you prove
So rough, I will not harbor here* but seek
The world through, for an altar worthy of
My labors. So, fair proud, farewell.

Art gone! I did not well to tempt a part
I knew not how to act, to hide a flame
I could not well conceal: for hereby have
I drove him quite away. -- Euriphila,
Thou were too blame. -- Well, I will after him,
And try if I can fetter him with gifts,
Whom love cannot entangle: Mars is his god,
Not Venus; once more will I try, and show
Him plainly how I love him: Juno help,
And thou, O little deity of Love*
Besiege the castle of his stubborn breast,
Bend all thy batteries unto his heart,
Make it the mark of all thy golden darts.
Let him no more resist, but know thy power,
That Mars with all his armor, nor his forts,
Castles, or coats of mail, can fence him from
Thy little piercing shafts, which wound unseen.
And I will try what work a woman's arts
Can make against these stubborn warriors hearts.

I have but one heart to bestow, and that
Must not be Menaphon's; mine eyes do fix
On Melecertus, the best counterfeit
Of my lost Maximus: I cannot yet
Think on that name, but it does seem to chide
My hasty choice, and drown my love in tears.

What mean these sudden passions, Samela?
Have thou not here all thou can wish? what do
Thou want can make one happy, but content?

It Is true, I nothing want, that a poor wretch
Can wish for; but this happiness does mind
Me of my fore-past happiness that is lost.
Is It possible the vein of true love can
Be broken, and the wound not bleed afresh
At every thought! Alas! my heart's so full
Of tears and grief, that some will overflow.

Had thy tears power to raise the dead again,
Then were they lawful and commendable:
But since that tears are fruitless, and your friends
(Like water spilt) now past recoverie,
It is but folly to weep for the dead.
Pursue no more fled joys, turn and receive
Those coming pleasures which do court your hand
To take them. If thou will listen to my love --

I like my grief much better than thy love.


Why so nice and coy fair Lady
Prithee why so coy?
If you deny your hand and lip
Can I your heart enjoy?
Prithee why so coy?
For thy flitting joys are past,
I will give thee joys at last.
Joys that shall create each other,
Make thee both a wife and mother.

Y're merry, Menaphon, but I cannot join
In consort with you. Seek some other mate;
I have no heart to give, nor hand to take
Your gift. Another reaps what you have sown,
And like to enjoy what you have hoped in vain.

Another reap what I have sown! Is this
Your gratitude you so much boasted of?
Have I supplied your wants with plenty, and
With scorn do you repay my charity?
Did I relieve you in distress for this? --
By Pan, the god of shepherds, or return
Love for my love, or be turned out of doors.

My heart never knew what baseness meant,
Of thankful thoughts for your civilities; (it is full
If those will satisfy, I Will employ all
The Exchequer of my breast; bu^ as for love,
Alas! that is not in my power to give*

I saw your loose eyes at the shepherds feast,
Roved every where, but Melecertus was
The mark they aimed at most. Well, get you gone,
Expect no more from me, but slight and scorn.

My grief was ominous, and did presage
This sad mishaps was I not crossed enough
Before? when will my sufferings have an end!
Well, I Will go seek my uncle Lamedon,
The comfort and companion of my woes.

Love bids me go, but reason bids me stay;
Reason! thou have no share in love; I Will on*
Love is a passion* passions know no laws,
The gods themselves cannot be wise and love.
Friend Plusidippus, hark, who would have thought
You so faint-hearted, that a maidens frowns,
Could turn the edge of your affections?
No, madam, but your scorn has whet the edge
Of my resolves, to seek some other clime
May prove more temperate: Arcadia is
The place I aim at, where, I Am told, there dwells
A Lady of that beauty, that the world
Cannot show her second; thither am I bound.

You do but jest, I hope, I Am sure I did*
No other; for I love thee with my heart,
And may these signs confirm it that I do.

I must not dwell at these signs, well I may
Bait for a while, but cannot make a stay.
Arcadia is the place I visit must,
That is the center whereunto I tend,
And where my labors hope to find an end.

What, must a Lady woo you to accept
Her favors? Come, what need have thou to seek
Dangers, and love abroad, who have at home
The only daughter of a King, who courts
Thee for thy love? what mean those silent looks?
Hear me, my Plusidippus: what, still mute?

Th'attractive of that beauty I have seen
But in a picture. will not let me rest,
Until I see that creature so divine,
Arcadia is blessed withal, to be
The happy casket of so rich a jewel.

By all the love thou ow'st my fathers care,
I do adjure thee to stay here with me,
And in mine arms I Will lodge thee until time*
Shall make thee King of Thessaly; meanwhile
Let me be happy in th'enjoyment of
Thy company, and seek not toils and care,
When thou may live more happy here, than
Can wish, or find in any other place.

My Genius prompts me, that I must not rest thou
Here, for the gods do seem to call me hence*
And their decrees I may not break, nor will.

This scorn tormenth me, yet can I not
Repay his hate with hate; but I do love
Him more. Love, this is tyranny in thee.
Here comes my Father, may his news be good.

Now forward girl, did I for this provide
An husband for you? do you thus reward
My love to you, to slight him whom I love?
Your scorns will force him from our Court to fly.
And now I hear, he will to Arcadia.

Believe it, Sir, it is far from me to wish,
Or be the cause of his departure hence.

Yes, yes, your peevishness I hear's the cause,
Nay, I my self have heard, with shame to think
You so much scorned a man, I so much loved.
Did I grace him, that you should disgrace him?

Great Sir, the greatest loss is mine; and none
Can tell with what an heavy heart ^ shall
Be forced to part with him. And therefore, if
You please to use your power to stay him here,
You may so be my father the second
Time* by preserving the life you gave me,
Which, without his presence, is nothing worth.
As you tender the life of a daughter,
Or the welfare of a maid, endeavor
His stay, or I shall follow him to death. --

I Will find him out and try what power I have
Upon him: I suppose my kindnesses
To him, may well deserve his acceptance,
They have not been such as should weary him,
Nor is a Crown a thing to be slighted,
Nor easily obtained; yet his stay*
May purchase mine, and it is an easy rate.

What, Niece, still weeping! cannot curing time
Invent a plaster for thy wounds, but that
They still thus bleed afresh? what is the cause?

Dearest Uncle! who hitherto have been
The only Partner and Physician
Of all my griefs; unless your skill can fit
A cure unto my present cares, I must
Yield to their strength, for with continued
Batteries they so assault me now, that
I must be forced to sink under their weight.

Why, what new cross has happened unto thee?
That thus renews thy grief? Come, tell it me;
And doubt not of my readiness to try
All means for thy relief; but first it is fit
I know the cause, the first step to the cure.
Unbosome then thy grief, and give it vent;
Is Menaphon as kind as he was wont?

That name it is that is my sorrows spring
From whence these tears do flow, it is he alone --
Unkind and false, base-minded Menaphon. --

Out with it all, and tell me how he has
Abused thee, and I will try to right
Thee, and requite him for his injuries.

When as he saw I would not satisfy
His foolish fancy, for which cause alone
He hitherto has entertained us,
And not for to relieve our wants; he sees
His hopes are frustrated, and I despise
His clownish love, he turned me out of's doors:
Where shall we lie? we are exposed unto
The mercy of the kinder elements;
The heavens must be our canopie, and the earth
Our bed, the poor flocks our companions.

Well, fear not, S^^^la, already I
Have found a way to case thy mind; I have
A little money left, and there withal
Soon shall I purchase a small flock for thee:
Where thou shall live secure, and free from fear,
Enjoy thy little with content; there is
A shepherd lately dead, whose flock I Will buy,
And thou shall be it is Mistress, Samela.

Uncle, my thanks shall ever ready be
For you, as always is your care for me.
But let your haste prevent my coming griefs,
For griefs have wings, wherewith they fly to us,
Comforts are leaden heel'd, and move but slow.

Fear not, I will dispatch it suddenly,
The shepherd Doron's brother's lately dead,
And he has the disposal of the flock,
As soon as I can find him, we will try
If reasonable price will make them ours,
See where he comes preventing me; Doron,
The merry shepherd! whither away so fast*

I Am running for my life, Sir, my brother's
Lately dead, and I Am afraid death will catch
Me too, if I don't make haste. I Am sure
Carmela has half cut the thread of my
Life in twain, with the hook of her cruelty:
Besides, Moron's sheep are roving to find
Their master, and they I go till they lose
Themselves, if I find them not the sooner.

Moron! what was he a kin to a fool?


Why he was my own brother, Sir.


I thought so. Dor. I must be gone.


Nay, stay Doron, what will thou take, and we
Will ease thee of the trouble of thy sheep.

By my troth Sir, and you shall have them, but
What will you give me, and you shall have
His flock, -- ay and me too, if you will, for
I think Carmela will not.

Will these content thee for thy sheep?


Ay marry, this is something lik -- you
Shall have them Sir, were there as many
Of them as there are hairs on their
Backs. -- They talk of a golden fleece
But I think I have made their fleeces
Gold now. Come Sir, I Will deliver you the sheep.

Forlorn, forsaken, and the object made
Of all the shepherds storms! what shall I do*
Love is no god, Fortune is blind, and can
Not help; sleep flies, and cares possess my head.
Mirth makes me melancholy, company
Yields me no comfort: when I am alone,
A thousand fancies do distract my thoughts:
And when I try to drown my cares in wine,
They swim aloft, and will be uppermost.
I Will try if I can sing my cares asleep.
Ye restless cares, companions of the night,
That wrap my joys in clouds of endless woes,
Spare not my heart, but wound it with your ^^ight,
Since love and fortune prove my equal fo^s.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Now will I take time by the fore-lock, and
Creep into Menaphon's breast, through the cracks
His minion S^^^l^ has made in it.
Friend Menaphon, what* is your courage cooled?

Cold entertainment has my courage cooled.


You know where you might have been let in, long
E're this, without assault or battery.
But you are served in your kind, for being coy:
Now you have met with your mate (friend) I hope.

She set my heart on fire by her presence,
That will not be put out by her absence.

Then I see you mean to follow her with
Your suit and service still, for all her scorn.

No, she has wounded me too deep, to make
Pursuit after her, therefore let her go.

Now then you know what it is to be slighted;
So once you slighted me, now I Will slight you.

Ah cruel love! whose music is composed
Of Lovers jars an discords, mixed with sighs!
If I turn traitor once more unto love,
I Will rob him of his deity, and pull
His little Kingdom down; I Will pull his wings,
And with the quils made into pens, and dipped
In saddest lovers tears, in stead of ink,
I Will Satyrs write against his tyranny.

Why then, my Plusidippus, will you leave
Us, and your fortunes? It is my resolve
To make you heir to my crown, my Son
And Successor.

Great Sir, I would not be
Fondly injurious to my self, or you,
Or so profane unto the gods, to slight
Their and your gifts, when proffered me so fair:
I must obey their dictates, and my vows,
Which call me to Arcadia, till when,
I cannot rest. Give me your Royal leave
To go, I will engage my hopes, and all
My future happinesses, to return
In so short a time as you shall limit me.

Then daughter, since it must be so, I can
Not tell how to deny his just request:
But see you part with him in friendship. And
The like Sir, I require of you to her.

Far b^ it from me to deny so fair
Requests* Lady, in sign hereof, I take
This parting kiss, and may it cancel all
Miscarriages* and seal Loves covenants.
And thus I take my leave but for a while.

Then take thee this my dearest heart, and bear
It with thee; may it be a charm to keep
Thy chaste affections from a Strangers love:
May your return shorten my tedious hours,
Since I neglect mine own content for yours.

It seems our Kink has pretty well outgrown
His griefs; and now he meditates new Loves.

The fire of love has thawed his frozen breast,
And turned his cold December into May:
His Scepter's changed into a sheep-hook, He
Is gone on pilgrimage to seek a wife
Amongst the shepherdesses; there is one
Whom I have seen, and he is gone to see,
May vie with Juno for precedencie:
Who in the habit of a Country lass,
Carries a Prince-like countenance and grace.
In The Arcadian Plains she keeps a flock
Of sheep, whose innocence and whiteness she
Surpasses, whilst the shepherds daily strive
Who shall bid fairest for this fairer prize.

And he will out-bid them all, if that will do.
But what a motley mixture will it be,
To see his gray hairs joined with her green
And springing youth? The strange effects of love*
Well may she be his nurse, but not his wife:
What Is love in young, is dotage in old men.

Love can create an Autumn Spring, in^u^^
New spirits in the old, and make them young
Besides, Honor's a bait frail women know
Not to resist: who would not be a Queen?

Once more does Fortune flatter me, with hopes
Of a contented life: now am I free
From jealous Menaphon's suspicions,
And without fear enjoy my wished love.
See where he comes, the picture drawn to th'life
Of my dead Maximus, my former joy.
All hail unto the fairest Samela,
And to her happy flock: I envy them
She is their Mistress, I her servant am.
Long since my heart was hers, may she but please
To take that kindly, which I freely give.

But, Melecertus, can I hope to find
You real unto me, whose worth I know
Cannot but be engaged already to
Some more deserving creature than poor I.

Lady, my services were never due
To any, but to one, which bond harsh death
Has cancelled to make me yours alone.

You call death harsh for freeing you from them,
And would you be in the like bonds again?

Your heavenly likeness does compel me to it
You are the same, but in another dress.
Let me no longer therefore strive to win
That fort, I so much covet to be in.

Then Melecertus take thy Samela.


Oh happy word! oh happy fate! the gods
If they would change with me, should give me odds.

THus* Jove changed shapes to satisfy his love,
He laid his godhead by; my Kingdom I
Have for a time forsaken, and exchanged
My royal robes for shepherds weeds. How light
(Me thinks) I feel my self! having laid by
My crown, with its companions heavy cares!
But who comes here? His paces to me tend.
Shepherd, well met, but why without a flock?
What, has the rot consumed thy sheep? or are
They gone astray?

No, not my sheep, but I,
So far, I almost know not where, or what
I am* -- to seek, as yet I know* not whom.

This old man dotes, and knows not what he says;
Where is thy bag-pipe, and thy merry lays,
That shepherds use to have in readiness?
Surely thou art no shepherd, but some goat
Crept lately into a sheeps habit. -- Do
Thou know the field of the fair Samela?

This boy will be my Rival, for that name
Sounds like the creatures that I seek for. -- No,
Go seek your Stamela, I know no such.

This is intolerable, -- I will scourge
Thee into better manners. -- But that divine
Appearance makes my spirits calm, and strikes
An awful reverence into my breast.
This is the beauty of the Arcadian Plains,
Sh'has shot her rays so home into my heart,
But partial fame was niggardly and base,
In giving but a glimpse of this rare beauty.

Do You know me, Sir, or have you lost your way?


I cannot likely lose my way, where I
Do find such glistring goddesses as you.
Indeed the force of such a light, may rob
Me of the office of mine eyes, and make
Them dark with too much brightness; can I choose
But gaze upon the Sun, when first I see it.

I think you lost your wits, or else your eyes,
That you mistake a glo-worm for the sun,
And make a goddess of a shepherdess.

Lady, if I have lost my wits or eyes,
It was with seeking you, whose beauty drew
Me hither; for your sake alone have I
Shook hands with Thessaly, and all my friends,
Only to join my hands and heart with you.

I should be loath to give my hand unto
So sudden a conclusion, and my heart
Is neither in my power or possession.

Fair Shepherdess, my errand is in love,
To yield my heart into your hands; it is yours,
By gift and conquest; I Am at your command.

If that you are at my command, be gone,
I cannot, will not listen to your words.

And have I left my dear Euriphila
For this! I see beauty makes women proud,
I would I were at Thessaly again,
There should I welcome be unto Euriphila,
Whose heart I know's my fellow-traveller,
Her salt rears, by this time, would make a sea,
Wherein I might swim back again with ease.

I see this youth's repul'st, and he is young
And stout, and well deserving, how shall I
Hope to prevail with her? if lively youth
She do despise, then much more cripling age:
Nor do I know what arguments to use,
Unless to tell her that I am a King,
And lay my Crown and Scepter at her feet,
Which she will scarce believe: my shepherds hook
Will not be taken for a scepter, nor
This poor cap for th'usurper of a crown. --
I have a way whereby to work my will,
And this young man shall be my instrument:
There stands a castle hard by, whither he
Perforce shall carry her. I Will work my will
Upon her, when I have her there confined.

I will revenge this scorn, if force or wit
Will do, I Will make her pride come down.

Be wise,
Young man, and valiant, and I will tell
Thee how thou shall obtein thy full desire.

But tell me how, and then let me alone To act, what e're it be.


A Castle stands
Near by, guarded with crows and negligence,
Thither thou may by force convey her, and
Then force her unto what entreaties cannot.

Old man, if I do gain her by thy means,
Thou shall not want reward: I know the place
Where she does tend her flock, and I Will watch her,
As she does them; and when I see my time,
I will convey her where you shall direct.

I will attend you here. -- Now must I plot
To get her in my power, and then I shall
Advance her to a crown against her will.
But yet, I cannot think Honor should need
An Advocate; women's ambitious thoughts
Do swim aloft, they love to be above
Their neighbors, envying every one whose height
Does overlook, and seems to upbraid
Their lowness by comparison; their minds
Are always climbing up to honors hill,
And pride, and self-conceit, are the two wings
Which elevate their thoughs to fly aloft.

Now, Mistress Coy, you are not in your own power,
But mine. Old shepherd, take thee charge of her.

Lady, you see what folly it is for you
To deny men what they can take without
Your leave. Now must you yield unto the
Of Thessaly. -- But if you will be wise,
And see a good when proffered, you may be Knight
A Queen* by granting of my suit, who am
King of Arcadia, although thus disguised.

My father Damocles! it is he now sues
To me his dauughter: He Is incestuous grown.

This is too woman-like, to turn away
From your own happiness. -- And it is strange,
That honor does not tempt her; thou shall have
A Crown and Kingdom at thy sole command,
And change these rural weeds for princely robes,
If thou will be my wife, pleasure for pain,
And plenty for thy poverty. What say?

Your potent batteries, and golden baits
Might win (perhaps) on some ambitious soul:
They nothing move me, to remove my love
Already placed on Melecertus, He,
He only does, and shall possess my heart.

A shepherd. Shall a shepherds basnesse stand
In competition, and outweigh a King?
A subject be before his Sovereign
Preferred? Oh how prepostrous are the minds
Of these fond women! Come, be well advised,
And change that petty pebble for a pearl.
It Is in my power to make thee happy, or
With one breath to blast the flower of thy hopes.
And to repay thy folly with thy shame.
Do not go on to kindle such a fire
Within my breast, as shall consume both thee,
And all that cross the current of my will.

I have already sad experience of
The wild effects of his enraged will,
Yet such the crosness of my fortune is,
I must again be made the subject of
His furious tyranny; but I Am resolved.
Know Sir, I value more my minds content,
Than all the gawdie shows Courts can present:
I am too well confirmed in the bliss,
And sweet content attends a Country life,
To leave it for the giddy-headed Court.
Besides, my true affections are so riveted
Unto my Melecertus, that nor frowns,
Nor flatteries shall part my heart from him.
Cease therefore farther to commence a suit
Nature forbids me grant, and you to ask.

And have I with my Kingly robes laid by
My Kingly mind? No, it shall never be said
A woman's will has contradicted mine.
But it is by policy that I must work,
Since I have laid my Kingly power aside,
I Will set my brains o'th'tenterhooks, and stretch
Them to their uttermost abilities,
To win this scornful beauty to my wife,
Or else revenge it with her dearest life.

My life has hitherto been checkered with
Variety of fortunes; sometimes with
A white of happiness, and then a black
Of misery; thus loves bright day of mirth,
Is followed with a darker night of woe.
How fair of late my fortune seemed to be,
And now, alas! o're-cast with blackest clouds
Of discontents, wherein I labor with
Important suits, I cannot, may not grant.
No, no, my Melecertus, I am firm
To thee, nor shall the rain of tears,
Or winds of threats remove me from thy love.
Be thou but constant, nay, I know thou art,
I will not wrong thee with so foul a thought,
As once to doubt thou can be otherwise.

You're from your shepherds now, or their defense,
Presume not they can rescue you, it is past
Their skill or power, to force you from mine arms.

Alas, fond boy! I scorn thy threats, as much
As I hate thee, or slight thy boasted strength.
Were but my Melecertus here, he would
Whip thy rudeness into better manners.

It Is well you are a woman (not a man,)
And have no other weapon but your tongue,
Which you are priviledg'd to use, and we
To laugh at. But in short, if you will accept
My love and service, then shall you be safe,
And happy: Soldiers cannot talk, but with
Their swords, and then they strike gainsayers dumb.

All this is nothing; for your words, nor swords
Shall not remove me from my dearest friend,
He has my heart, and I have nothing left
But hate, if you will accept of that, it is all
That I can give, or you receive from me.

You must be dealt with as we use to do
With sullen birds, I Will shut you up, and then
Perhaps you will sing another note, you are
Not yet in tune, you are too high for me,
But I will take you lower. I will plough
Your heart with grief, and then (perhaps) it will
Better receive the seed of my true love.

Sooner the turtle shall forget her mate,
Than I my Melecertus; and when I
Cannot see him with mine eyes, my mind shall rove,
Winged with desire, throughout the spacious world,
And find no rest, until it meet with him.
And though our bodies never meet, our souls
Shall join, and love each other after death.
Thus is true love immortal, and shall never
Die, but with our souls shall live for ever.

Shepherd, who e're thou art, I cannot choose
But envy thee thy happiness, who have
So true a love: I cannot but admire
This noble soul and love her, though she hate
Me for it; I Will treat her civilly, and if
I cannot obtain her for a wife, she shall
My goddess be, and I Will adore her name,
Though at a distance. Lady, will you walk?

It is an ill wind that blows no man good;
Though the Thessalian lad have got the prize
In his possession, it shall not be long,
But I will have them both in mine, I have
Dispatched a letter to my Lords, to send
Me suddenly some servants to assist
My plot. Now Menaphon, what is the news?
Great Sir, the messenger's returned, and brought
The men you sent for, they are here at hand.

It Is well; direct them to the castle that
I told you of, and give them charge to seize
Upon the buzzard and his prey, and bring
Them both to me: mean-time go you, and find
Out Melecertus, that I may be sure
Of him, for he is my rival in my love.

My Liege, all shall be done to your desire.


Blessed policy, thou far exceed'st dull strength,
That wanders in the dark of ignorance,
Wanting the eye of wisdom, both to guide,
And to defend it from approaching harms.
Thus art with ease does move the pondrous load,
Which strength could never master, or remove.
The Foxes tail must piece the Lions skin.
Little Ulysses with his wit did more
Against the foe, than Ajax with his strength.

It is some comfort yet that I can change
My prison, though I am a prisoner still,
Would I could change my company as soon.
But ah! most wretched Samela, who were
Born to misfortunes, and to nothing else:
As if that I alone were fortunes mark,
At which she only ayms her angry darts.
The morning of mine age was clouded with
Mishaps, and now my noon is like to be
The fatal night unto my misery. --
My Jailer is so kind, as if he meant
To bribe my love; but these are gilded pills
I cannot swallow. Should my Father get
Me into his possession once again,
I were as bad, or worse: I know too well
His passion, to hope any help from him.
I Will tell him plainly who I am, and try
If time have dulled the edge of's cruelty:
Perhaps the kinder gods may move his heart
To pity, and convert his rage to love.
He is my father still, and though unkind
To me, yet can I not forget I am
His child, and owe a duty to his name.
He is my King, and so I must obey
His will; if I must suffer, let it be
From his, rather than from a strangers hands.
I think I am provided now, if Poetry
Will do it, my Carmila is mine; these
Witty knaves, what fine devices they
Have got to fetter maidens hearts?
The Poet Orpheus made the Thracian
Dames dance after his pipe, and Ovid
Charmed the Emperors daughter with
His Poetry; there are some secret
Charms in these same verses sure.
Let me see here what I have got.
Ha Carmila, look here, I think
You Will love me now.
Carmila -- A Miracle.


A miracle, for what, Doron?


Why, a miracle of beauty, and I think
You Will be a miracle of folly, if you
Don't love me now.

What small Poet have you hired
To make a miracle of my name.

Nay, I have more yet, and better,
That I found in the Nichodemus
Of Complements, that is a sweet book,
It Is a very magazine of Poetry, a
Storehouse of wit; do but hear
Them Carmila.

Let Us hear them, Doron, are they
Worth a laughing at? Let Us hear.

Well, well, it is no laughing matter; but I Am
Sure your laughing has made me cry.
Now Carmila, you must imagine that it is
I, and only I, say this to you, and none but you:
For the unhappy wag has so fitted my
Fancy, as if 'twere made for no body but me.
Excellent Mistress, brighter than the Moon,
Than scowred pewter* or the silver spoon:
Fairer than Phoebus, or the morning Star,
Dainty fine Mistress, by my troth you are.
Thine eyes like Diamonds shine most clearly,
As I Am an honest man, I love thee dearly.
What think you now, Carmila, is not this
Admirable? if these strong lines will
Not draw your love, I know not what will.

Had it been your own mother-wit,
Doron, I could have like't it well:
But for you to father the brat of
Another's brain, is too ridiculous.
I like your love much better than your
Hackney lines: but bought wit's best.

If you like not my lines, because they are
None of mine, you will not love my
Heart neither, for that is not mine, but yours.

Yes, Doron, if you have given me your
Heart, I will not die in your debt, but
Give you mine in exchange for yours.

Than welcome to me my new found heart,
We Will live, and love, and never part.

Revenge shall soon o're-take this proud boy, who
Committed has so bold a rape upon
My Samela: He had been better to
Have lodged snakes in his breast, than to steal
This spark, that shall consume him and his nest.
Samela! Samela! that name alone
Infuseth spirits into me, inflames
My soul with vengeance, till I recover
My dearest love.

Now shall I be revenged on Samela,
And on her Melecertus both at once:
I Will make her know neglected love may turn
To hate, and vengeance take the place of scorn.
Well met friend Melecertus, what, alone?

I Am solitary since my mate is gone.


Your mate has taken flight, she is on the wing,
But I can tell thee where she nests, and bring
Thee guickly where thou shall retrive the game.

If thou will do this, Menaphon, I shall
Be studious to requite thy love with mine:
I pay thee sterling thanks and services.

I will not sell my favors to my friends,
My work is all the wages I expect.
Come, follow me, I Will lead thee to the place,
Where the fresh gamesters have thy love in chase.

Now Sir, you see the shepherd is become
A King; and though you have deserved death,
Yet since you have but acted our commands,
We here release you, and not only so,
But entertain you with all due respect,
At once belonging to our neighbour-Prince,
And near Allie, the King of Thessaly. --
Some secret power does force me love him so,
That if I had a daughter to bestow,
I Would wish no other Son-in-law, but him.
Now my Sephestia, what would I give,
Thou were alive, I had thee, and thou him.

He little thinks I am so near, or that
It is his daughter he would make his wife.

Thus, Gentlewoman, you are once more fallen
Into my hands, I am the Arcadian King:
Be sudden therefore to give me your love,
Or else forseit your life for your contempt;
Think on it, and choose which you will rather do.

Sir, I am still the same I was before:
My love, like to a mighty rock, stands fast,
Disdaining the proud billows of your threats.
Crowns cannot tempt, nor Kings command my love,
My love is free, and cannot be compelled.
True love admits no partners, is content
With one, and Cupids statute law forbids
Pluralities of loves.

Since you are so stiff,
You will not bow, I Will make you bend, or break.

I am betrayed by this base Menaphon.


Here comes my Rival; when I have dispatched
Him to the other world, your plea is spoiled:
My sword shall cut your gordian knot in two;
Your ghosts may wed, your bodies never shall.
I Will be his Executioner my self,
I Will trust no other eyes to see it done.

Now is it time t'unmask, and let him know
He wounds his daughter through her Lovers sides.
Father, your fury once exposed me to
The greedy jaws of death, which yet more kind,
In pity saved my life, you sought to lose.
I Am your Sephestia, Father, know your child.

And is it possible, Sephestia lives,
Once more to enjoy her truest Maximus?

My Maximus, I Am thy Sephestia:
Oh that our Plusidippus too were here!

And I am he, my name is Plusidippus.


My dearest son! it is he; now were my joys
Complete indeed, were but my Uncle here.

I am so wrapped with joy, I scarce can get
Breath, to express my thanks unto the gods.

What will become of me? I shall be hanged,
Or lose my place at least; I Will get me home,
Amidst their mirth they will not think on me.

My only daughter! Dear Sephestia,
And you, kind Maximus, I ask
Both of you pardon for your injuries,
And for requital, thus I do create
Thee King of Arcadie; and may the gods
Requite your sufferings, and forgive my crimes.
Long may ye live, and happy; may your days
Be sunshine all, and know no clouds nor night.
And that we may not leave one string untuned,
My brother comes to make our consort full;
The best of brothers, and the best of friends,
Thanks for your care of her, whom you have made
Your daughter by a better claim than mine.
Now let the whole land swim in mirth, and load
The altars with their thankful sacrifice
Unto the kinder deities, who through
A sea of woes, have sent us happiness.
Let Us in, and hear the strange adventures have
Befaln your heaven-protected persons; griefs
Grow less by telling, joys are multiplied.
Although against them all things seem to strive,
At last just men and lovers always thrive.


