GOod Morrow Mr. Pudding, how is it now?


Never more at hearts ease in all my life.


What news at Westminster to day?


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, fa, la, la, ha, ha, fa, la.


Tell me Mr. Puding what you laugh at that I may laugh with you and be merry.


I am going to see a Play, a new Play after the old fashion, that makes me so
merry


But prithee tell me who plays the devils part.


In good truth Sir Arthur Hasilrigg.


He Is full of compunction is he not?


He hates Charles Stuart inveterately, because he has gained a vast estate of
his lands into his hands, and holds it for his own


What! my Lord Lambert, Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and Sir Henry Vane, well met all
three of you, whither are all of you bound you go so fast, and want your
horses? what all alike, all alike


I am bound for the West, to visit Sir George Booth, and I hope he will make me
welcome; for I hear his Lands are restored again, which by my unjustness was
sequestered


The Devil he will; he cannot choose but make you welcome, with a Fox to you.


Sir, I am going to Portsmouth, for I hope they will entertain me with all
respect


Thou look so like the Devil that they will raise the Bulwarks of the great
guns against your highness


I am bound to my country house for my healths sake, thank the Rump.


I Will turn Doctor, and give you a Scotch pil; fear you not an Apothecary, for I
was Mountebanck to Nol with the great Nose; my Pills wrought so effectually that
they brought him to rest


Puddings pills will make you shit out your disease as freely as you was shit
out of the Rump, your self, and ease your discontents


May it please your honors to play one game at Honors, and I Will furnish you
with Cards


What will you play for John Lambert.


An English Crown if you please.


Are you all agreed or not?
All answers, We are all agreed.

I Will deal, Lambert do you shuffle, and Pudding shall cut and we will play the
knaves to the purpose, to make you all merry


I like not his cheating play, he Jugles, I Will play no longer, I Will play no
longer, by my Bishopric of Durham, he is a false player


I Will shuffle the Cards my self.


Vane, you play Legerdemain underhand, see how he culs out the Knaves, to put
them into his own hands, and cheat us all, but we want a fourth man to make up
the set


I Will play if you please.


Not with us, we will have no fools.


If you had cast all the knaves then.


I Will make a fourth man.
Are you all greed? yes, yes.

You shall be my partner then.


With all my heart, I will, I will.


Shuffle Gaffer General Fleetwood.


Vane, I see, must of necessity be with me, Gaffer Fleetwood, you are a cunning
Gamster, and the cheatingest player in this Nation, play fair or I will kick
you out of the Company


Hark, hark, a noise, a noise!


What is it, what is it, hey, hey, hey,


The North wind, it blows strong.


Lambert shut you the door, keep out the wind, rise and begone, I Will keep
your stake, and my own I Will warrant you


Gaffer Fleetwood, that's fowl play, to send Lambert to shut the door whilst you
run away with all the money


Hold thy tongue, there is half a piece for thee; if any enquire for me, tell
them I am gone to the Committee of Safety


Lambert is come again, call them away, to come and play out their game, I say.


Come all away, come all away, sit down.


Deal Fleetwood, deal Fleetwood, why are you so slow to deal to others, and so
quick to deal to your self, we all weight upon you


I am sure he sent me to shut the door, and carried away my money instead of
his own


Sirs you do not make use of your time, know not you that the Drums will beat
buy and buy, are you mad, make use of time, whilst time is to be had


Play quick, silently, and now play round.


Who dealt, who dealt this round?


My Lord General Fleetwood.


If he be all wood, sound or rotten t'wil burn.


Can you tell whether here or in Hell?


He Will have all the whole pack except four.


What four I wish for no more --


What the Devil ale you Hasilrig, blow in my blowing box, and I will show you
how to Conjure, command what you please in your thoughts, it shall be performed
by your blast, blow strong sweet or sower


I have blown such a blast; my mind, etc.


By all the virtue in my conjuring books,
The City Gates are all blown off the hooks.

Your Honors fury to this cities known,
What would you do if that it were your own?

The Golden Chains should quickly fly,
My self would Reign without tranquillity.

My mind unto remembrance calls one thing
That all this time you played without a King.

Through up your cards, your game is not worth a pin.


Then for a fool I will come in.


Sir Arther many maimed Soldiers wait for you.


Let them wait and be hanged.


Speak to them your self, you will please them.


Who desires to speak with Arthur Haslrig?


Your honors Soldiers for their Pention, we are all in are are fifteen Months.


You are no Soldiers, but a pack of rogues.


It becomes not your honor to call all Soldiers Rogues.


The Gods confound your honor.


Sir William Waller will tell you that you rid the field of your person at the
Vize, or run away, that is plain


Play your game or give over.


Sir Arthur play Durham Bishopric, the old quit rents or yearly revenues, was
one thousand six hundred twenty one pounds eighteen shillings and three pence,
whereof the Bishop paid to the King, one hundred sixty two pounds, two
shillings six pence and odd, beside Mr. Colingwoods lands, and several Parks
and other Lands, which for the company sake I forbear to name


Play round a Crown a head boys.


What never a King here to be found?


I fear he will be at my hand too soon.


Where Is the King, in your hand?


Upon my life I Will keep him out, he shall be a King and no King at all, by my
consent


Suppose they have but Fleetwood, Lambert, Haslrig and Vane into a bag, the
first that comes forth, will be a -- what you please


Come see quickly a fine sight:


Gaffer King, Gaffer King, hear, here they have put Lambert and Haslrig into a
great Bird-Cage; did you ever see the like to this that they have now done


They look like two night birds, and sing most melodiously, shitten sweetly,
the one sings on this wise in the Cage

I do desire Portsmouth, once more to see.

The other answered.

I would I was at Durham now with thee.


Lambert What have you now in your hat?


My head yet, so long as I can keep it.


My Lord, be well advised er'e you parr with it.


So I will I Will warrant thee Pudding.
They all sing together.
Now let us all together rant and sing,
Though here be all the knaves, we want the King
Here may we be and the Country not offend,
Waiting daily, expecting of our end.


