THE COURAGEOUS TURK, OR, AMURATH THE FIRST.

A Tragedy, Written by THOMAS GOFF Master of Arts, and student of
Christ-Church in OXFORD, and Acted by the Studens of the same house

The second Edition

LONDON, Printed for G. BEDELL and T. COLLINS, at the middle Temple Gate
Fleet Street. 1656

SIR, THis with another Tragedy, entitled, The raging Turk, the issue of one
man's brain; are now come forth together from the Press, nearer allied, even
as Twins in this their second birth; They are full of Glory, Strength, and
indeed full of what not, that beautifies? The more apt to be soyled, opposed,
and disgraced; the rather, because the Auther has made his Exit hence. The
intent, and use of Dedication (as I have observed) is to no other end, then
that ignorance and spite, (sworn Enemies to ingenuity) should know upon their
dull or envious dislikes, whether to repair and recieve reformation. The
Fatherless fellow-Orphan to this work rests safe under the protection of
your most noble Brother, my much honored Friend, Sir Richard Tichborne, Knight
and Baronet; Now for these reasons, and that I might not make them strangers by
remote fosterings, but especially standing to you (most worthy SIR) equally
engaged, I this to you Present and Dedicate: Together tendering the Love and
unfeigned acknowledgements, o

Your most embounden Servant, RICHARD MEIGHEN.
I Will not praise this Work, 'twere lost,
Rich Pearls best praise themselves; nor will I boast
To be possessed of more than India's wealth,
That were the way to lose't, since I my self
Distrust my self in keeping it, and stand
In fear of robbing by some envious hand:
Robbed of it, said I? Alas, that fate were just,
Since I am found first thief to you, who durst
Unbidden thus, ransacke your precious store;
This magazine of wit, so choice; nay more,
Steal from the chariot of the glorious Sun,
This heavenly fire. What shall I say, it is done;
I do confess the enditement, pity then
Must be my surest Advocate amongst men.
None can abate the rigor of the Law,
But the Lawgiver; but me thoughts I saw,
(Or hoped I saw) some watery beams of Mercy
Break, glimpsing forth of your imperious eye.
O let me beg reprive, your pardon may
By due observance come another day.
Here lo, I tender't back to bide the doom,
By promise bound to him, to him with whom
I would not break for all rich Tagus sands;
Now he the Prisoner at your mercy stands.
-- Ergo ibit in ignes
Hoc opus aeternum ruet, and tot bella, tot Enses
In Cineres dabit hora nocens. --
Were not our present subject mixed with fear,
'Twould much affright us to see all you here.
One would suffice us, or no Auditor.
Each to himself an ample Theater,
Let rude Plebeians think so, but we know
All judgments here from the same Spring do flow;
All here have but one censure, all one breast,
All sons of the same Mother; but the rest
We preoccupate their Censure, and foretell,
What after may be said not to be well.
As in most decent Garments you may see.
Some gracious Ornaments inweaved be;
Which serve for little use; but on some day
Destined to please himself, the wearer may
Without a blush put on, when his best friends
Intend to visit him. So our hope intends
The sacred Muses Progeny to greet,
Which under our Roof, now the third time meet.
We will not open the book to you, and show
A story word by word, as it does go;
But give invention leave to undertake,
Of it is own strains, some benefit to make:
For though a Tragic Pen may be confined
W thin a studies private Walls, the mind
Must be unbounded, and with inventions steel,
Strike fire from the alient Flints --
So free we are from setting any price
On these our studied Vanities, that advice
Almost disdained the whispers of those tongues
Which, private first, though vented, public wrongs
To the Patient, Patient often. We'il here begin
To be a little peremptory. Oh that sin
Of wilful indiscretion; it is no bays
To make us Garlands of our own mouths praise.
Which who affect, may they so Laurel lack,
That slanders Thunders may behind their back
Blast them with Calumny; for we vow, they dear
Pay for their pains, that give attention here.
And since it is suffered with kind indulgence,
We hope that Kingly Parent's our defense;
Who would not have his dandling love be known,
But unto those had offspring of their own.
And (for we are assured that here be
No brains so cursed with black sterilitie,
But of some nature they can freely call
Births more mature, and Caelestiall;
Their studies issue) they, like kindest Mothers,
With tender hands will swath the limbs of others.
A Suppo'd Victory by AMURETH
Obtained in Greece, where many captives taken,
One among the rest, IRENE, conquers him,
For, taken with her love, he sounds retreat
Eternally from War: but after, moved
With murmur of his Nobles, in her bed,
Before his Councils face, strikes off her head.
Then ruminating former bloody broils,
He straight o'recomes all Christian Provinces,
Invades the Confines of his Son in Law,
Fires Caramania, and makes Aladin
With His Wife and Children suppliant for their lives:
At length appointed his great'st Field to fight
Upon Cassanae's Plains; where having got
A wondrous Conquest against the Christians,
Comes the next morn to overview the dead;
Amongst whom a Christian Captain, Cobelitz,
Lying wounded there, at sight of Amurath,
Rising and staggering toward him, desperately
With a short dagger wounds him to the heart,
And then immediately the Christian dies.
The Turk expiring, Bajazet his Heir
Strangles his younger brother: Thus still springs
The Tragic sport which Fortune makes with Kings.
BE dumb those now harsh notes, our softer cares
shall never be acquainted with such sounds.
Peace (our grand Captain) see here Amurath,
that would have once confronted Mars himself,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens; and does hate
through bloody Rivers to make passages,
whereby his Soul might flote to Acheron.
Wrinckle your brows no more (stern fates) for we
scorn to be made the servile Ministers
to cut those threads, at which your selves have trembled,
esteeming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet must great Amurath thank those sacred powers,
they have enricht our souls with such a price,
as had those Heroes, whose revengefull Arms
served Mars a ten years Prentiship at Troy,
ere dreamed succeeding times should be possessed
with such an unparalleled, unprized beauty as my Saint,
they would not have prevented so their bliss,
but been most humble Suitors to the Gods
to have protracted their then fond spent life
but to behold this object; which out-shines
their Helena, as much as does the eye
of all the World dazzle the lesser fires.
Jove, I Will outbrave thee; melt thy self in Lust,
embrace at once all starre-made Concubines,
I Will not envy thee, know I have to spare
beauty enough, to make another Venus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
to make me happier, here I Will place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.

But (gracious Lord) those streams (we see) soon ebb,
which with outrageous swelling flow too fast;
forbid (Lucina) this soon kindled fire,
should ere burn out it self. It Is a true Theme,
That nere lasts long, that seems most extreme.

Can this rich price of nature, precious jem,
give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these arms are curious chains of love,
with which thou link'st my heart aeternally,
thy cheeks the royal Paper interlined,
with Natures Rhetorique, and loves persuasion
stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This then I Will read, and here I now will feign,
that those all antique fables of the Gods
are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
was fair Europaes, which they say, made Jove
turn a wild Heyfer: next, this sparkling eye
was the Aemonian Io's: then, this hand
Laedaes, fair Mother to those Star-made Twins;
Thus, thus I Will Comment on this golden Book:
Nature nor Art, have taught me how to feign;
Fairest, 'twas you first brought me to this vain:
In loving Combats, now I valiant prove,
let othets war, great Amurath shall love.

Brave resolution! O the fond thoughts of man!
awake Euno! I Will find stratagems:
There shall be Physic, to purge this disease:
light sores are gently used; but such a part
must be cut off, left it infect the heart.

Schahin, Our Tutor, we command this night
be solemnized with all delightful sports
thy learned invention best can think upon.
Prepare a Mask, which lively represents,
how once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
us by examples; but we'll smile to think,
how poor and weak their idle faining was
to our affection. Schahin, be free in wit,
and sudden: now come my Kingdoms Bride:
Hymen would wed himself to such a Bride.

Nature, and all those universal powers,
which showed such admirable Godlike skill,
in framing this true model of our selves,
this Man, this thing called man, why do you thus,
make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
when in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdom, with a complete state
will governed, and well managed in him self:
both each man bears, when that best part of man,
(Reason) does sway and rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if Will
makes them once Master, they will prove Tyrants still.
No more King now, poor Subject AMURATH;
whom I have seen, break through a Troop of Men,
like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Acts,
which 'ene the Furies would have trembled at:
Treading down Armies, as if by them he meant
of dead men's backs to build up stairs to Heaven:
And now ly'th lurking in a woman's arms,
drencht in the Lethe of Ignoble lust,
appoints me for the wanton Engineer
to keep his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune.
Woman, enticing woman, golden hook
to catch our thoughts, and when we once are caught
to drag's into the public view of shame;
And there we lie bathed in incestuous pleasure
for all good men to laugh and scorn at once.
Bane to my senses! I could either wish
our birth were like those Creatures, which we say
Are bred from putrid and corrupted matter;
Then that we should acknowledge our dear being
with grass and flowers: for what else is our state
up to the top? But then the weight shall fall
upon their head that caused it. Work (my brain)
tush, blood, no^ water must wash off this stain.

Shine here (my beauty) and expel the night
more than a thousand stars that grace the Heavens:
Me thinks, I see the Gods inventing shapes
in which they mean to court thee. Jove he frowns,
and is more jealous, more suspicious
of thee, then all the painted Truls, whose eyes
bedeck the all ennamel'd Firmament.

Beauty (my Lord) it is the worst part of woman,
a weak poor thing, assaulted every hour
by creeping minutes of defacing time;
A superficies which each breath of care
blasts off: and every humerous stream of grief,
which flows from forth these Fountains of our eyes,
washes away, as rain does Winters snow.
But those blessed guiders of all Nuptial rites,
have wrought a better cement to make fast,
the hearts of Lovers; the true name of Wife
guilds over our thrones, with a more constant shape
than can be subject or to time, or care:
And in our selves; yea in our own true breasts
we have obedience, duty, careful Love;
And last and best of all, we may have Children,
Children are Hymen's pledges, these shall be
perpetual chains, to link my Lord and me.

Art thou a Woman? Goddess, we adore,
and Idolize what we but loved before.
What Devils have men been, whose furious brains
have often abused that Deity called Woman:
dipping their Ravens quil in Stygian Ink,
to blast such heavenly paper as your faces!
Were all the enticing lusts, damned policies,
prodigious fascinations, unsearcht thoughts,
dissembled tears, broke vows, loathed appetites,
luxurious and unsatiate desires;
Were all these of women equally weighed,
that virtue in thy breast 'twill out-balance all,
and recompense the ruin of all thy Sex.

So please your Majesty, L. Schahin's ready
for entrance with his Masque.

Tell him, we are wholly bent for expectation.
Sit, sit (my Queen) Music exceed your Spheres,
think I am Jove, and Godlike please our ears.

Gaze you mortals, gaze you still,
On the Gods now look your fill.
Jove and Juno are descending,
Yet her Jealousie's not ending,
Mars, stern Mars, he will not fight,
But with Venus when it is Night.
Daphne crowns Apollos head,
Whom she would embrace in Bed;
Neptune swells his frothy cheek,
Cause Diana is not meek.
Gaze you mortals, etc.

Come now my (Sister and Wife) we will begin
to court afresh! Nay, loure not (Heavens Queen)
here on this green we'll a Lavalto dance;
What if our hairs grow silver, yet our strength
Is young, and vigorous. Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares
Lie drencht in our Nepenthe) take your Queens, and be
All joviall; Mars for our Daughter Venus,
Apollo join with Pallas, Brother of Floods
embrace Diana; Gods sometimes merry be;
but in the night, when mortals may not see.

How now (wanton?) Can I no where go,
for recreation, but you follow me?

Is this your recreation? Fie! My Lord,
will you be wanton still! For here you came
For some new Harlot, some new Queen for you.

Juno, Wife.

Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banished from Heaven I am; and your Bed:
resign them both to Strumpets, Concubines.
And now you come to see a fresh new less,
in which Pole now, or in what part of heaven
shall she be stellified?

Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent?
well (Juno) well, you will ever be a woman,
a very, very woman! But since she scolds,
Let Us hence (ye Gods) lest her infectious breath
blast the succeeding day; and mortals curse
her hel-bred jealousy: Calumnious woman,
Come, scold in heaven; For if Gods lived on Earth,
suspicious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.

Well, Jove looked pale, I touched him to the quick;
it is some new Minion he came down to see:
Hark (jealousy) know Juno is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistress Bride, adieu,
Jove shall not steal a kiss; My curse is past,
when thou sleep'st first a Bride, may sleep thy last.

Fair Bride, I sang thy Epithalamy,
and left Elysium for thy Nuptials:
Juno here thundered 'against the Thunderer;
knowing how thy beauty dazles hers,
she durst not let heavens King once glance a look,
but threatened with her helbred incantations,
to metamorphise thine unparall'ell'd
and most caelestial shape into worse forms;
And more prodigious than ever poisoned charms
wrought on the fabled Concubines of Jove:
but know great Queen, my Mother Venus vows
her everlasting guard to save such beauty;
Lest if thou perish, Nature her self
lose her only parterne of serenity.
But I must have, Love, which the Gods protect,
can never be endangered by neglect.

Schahin, thine Art is excellent but say,
do Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?

My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
the show more pertinent, and to grace your Queen,
conceit took leave to put the frown on Juno.

My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankful
and rest a Debtor to your courtesy.

Not so, fair Queen, but durst I now entreat
the Kings detaining from the sweets of Bed,
there yet remains one thought upon conceit,
which you would doubly grace me to behold.

Our worthy Tutor shall obtain a night,
a night of us, in any case we can!

But then let me inform your Majesty,
that it is a warriors show, which once you loved,
but now are free from.

it is best of all, with greediness we will see it,
O how the soul does gratulate it self
when safely it beholds the dangerous state
of others, and it self security free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
and see afar off others tossed in the Sea:
or in a Gallery at a Fencers stage,
we laugh when mutually each one takes wounds;
Sit still (Eumorphe:) Schahin, thy show in have;
It Is best delight, to think on troubles past.

Stay you most worthy shades* brave Hector, stay;
And proud Achilles, know your massy Tombs,
which have so long orewhelm'd your valiant bones,
yawnes wide to let the imprisoned coarses forth.
I must afresh imbalme your sacred Trunkes,
and sweet your memory with most happy oil
of just report; the Gods awakt me Fame
from out the oblivious Sepulcher of sleep,
to drop that Ink into old Homers pen,
wherewith he curiously has lined your names,
enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
and make them live to all posterity.
Virtue to valor has his gift assigned,
great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.

(...)
most fortunate young man, whose worth is crowned
with everlasting Trophies of renown,
how has he set thee on the wings of fame
which soar in the middle region of high glory,
proposed to all, a never dying story!

May it please thee (Son of Jupiter) to accept
a Present, which our fight enricht us with?

Is it a Band of stubborn Soldiers, Captain?

O no (my Liege) of exquisite formed Ladies,
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sex;
Besides a Troop of such shaped Ganimedes,
that Love not equals.

Philoxenus, We thank thee. Yet hark,
there is a secret we would know of thee,
and you must tell Us: on your faith you must.

My Liege --

Nay, no Court oil (by your leave) no flattery,
we are but man, this very trunk of ours,
Is but a Vessel filled with humane blood,
and we trust not that Parasite like pen,
(...).
All the destroying vices of frail man,
I may be subject to; but what base looseness,
or supple Luxury, did thou ere observe
so to benumne our sense, that thou should think
we could be pleased with such effeminate Presents?
Know sir, our eyes shall have that abstinence
that will not look on them, on boys, or women.
Hence then, and present some coward with them.
Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
and make them bend their Ivorie brows to the Earth;
a man, a Soldier, strong with his wounds;
amongst fate and ruin, upright and unshap't,
his mind being all his guard, his wall, and armor*
and if he fall, still noble wrath remains
in his amassed Trunk: not all the darts
stuck in his sides, making him all one wound,
affright his courage; but wrath lending weapons,
himself does seem a new and horrid War.
Nor are those Milke-sops which beguile the time,
with stealing minutes from their Ladies lips,
such as the Gods do love; for as the Wind
loses it is force, if it be not opposed
with woods of strong and stubborn planted trees;
So Virtue, if it walk in trodden paths.
That breaks up honors gap, and makes the way
through paths of death: that flame burns strong
which is resisted: valor shines in wrong:
Of Alexanders Soldiers be this said,
war was as peace, when he the army led.

Brave Macedon, how truly have thou weighed
the reason of man's birth! who is equal borne,
for all the world, as well as for himself.
the world's a field too narrow for thy worth,
and allthough Nature has her enacted bounds
for Sea and earth, nay for the heavens themselves,
nor Sea nor earth shall coope thy valor up:
Valor of Nature ever this attaines,
that it breaks forth, far, and beyond her chains,
and this I Will trumpet out; The whole worlds Ball,
in which thou art so great, to thee is small.
When men want worlds to show their virtue in,
that is the crime o'th Gods, and not their sin:
It Is a decree of a true Soldiers mind,
to think naught done, when ought is lest behind.
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint
a Grecian Prince, who so shall steep his quill
to paint thy name in Wels of eloquence,
that this thy scorn of Lust shall be proposed
for Kings example to posterity.
Know mortals, that the men the Gods most love,
in hard and dangerous Arts they always prove
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
their bad is Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
he but goes backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awful end,
though most men fear, yet all men must commend.

Scahin, the Macedon's heholding to thee,
and history shall pay you thanks for this,
which we rest Debtors for.

Great Prince, such kindness of acceptance pays
For things which are but for a Kings delight:
in seeing them, he amply does requite.

Eumorphe, Love, Queen, Wife, le'ts have to Bed,
and may we wish this night eternal time.
Scahin, good night: good night, kind gentelmen.
Thus when we are dead shall we revive of the stage:
one hour can present a kings whole age.

Observed you not the Kings looks? Grew they not pale?

O yes (Lord Schahin) you must be his Parent,
and snatch him out of the Gulf he is falling in.
That feigned speech of Alexanders wrought
like to most purging Physic; nights then black,
when it is compared with day: Boldness is clear,
when it is presented before bastard fear.

I Will tell thee, Eurenoses, thou art a Soldier,
and I am both a Soldier, and a Scholar;
And for these two Professions am both most glorious,
and most meritorious; Pallas is for both:
O what Tysiphon, what snaked scourge
can make a Scholar, that should never sleep,
but 'twixt the Pillowes of Pernaessus Hills,
and dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
make him by snoaring on a wanton breast,
and suck the adulterate and spiced breath
of a lewd famed woman?

And for a Soldier (Schahin,) let me speak:
We that do know, the use of swords and fire,
we that do know, halters can throatle us,
shall we ere venture on a Woman's cruelty?
We that endure no Lords, shall we endure
a woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon,
I reverence thy memory: no pewling phrase
could so enchaine thee to thy Thracian Dame,
but thou would rather perish than she save thee.
I Will not declaime long on that common theme,
but they have lust lie in their fingers ends,
and whilst their sweet-hearts breath sticks in their sheets,
they will admit another Lucrece in the day,
to be a Thais, if the night will not gainsay.

Why (Eurenoses) why should we endure
a new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heirs:
we know (should we have more) 'twere dangerous.
But hark! The Queens for Bed-inticing sleep
with charms of Music: well, even such a Night
may yet prove dismal ere the following Light!

Scahin, let us in:
the first degree to purge such ils as these,
is to instruct the patient his disease:
that you have done.

Yea, and will yet once more
adventure a new stratagem. Just when the King
h'as rid his Chamber, and with covetous have
thinks for to clip Elisium, and drink deep
of his long wished delight, I having skill
and uncontrolled access, will in disguise
seem his deceased Fathers apparition:
and by all ties of children to their Parents,
bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.

An easy Medicine does and sure will work,
to rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Foul Medicines we worse brook, than a foul sore.

Madam make have, The King will be impatient
if he be from you long. O Happiness!

Why Menthe! then thou deem'st us happy
thus to command a world of services,
to have a King my subject; and attended
with these harmonious sounds t'affect our ears?

Yes (truly Madam) it is a happiness.

It Is, were 't Eternal: but I fear a power,
a woman's power, does but make sport with us.
Why, were we not once (Menthe) a Captive Wretch?

Yes Lady! now your happinesse's the more:
Riches please best, when there went want before.

That power which raised us from so base, so high,
can throw us down again as suddenly:
Me thinks my life is but a Players Scaene
in the last Act: my part was then to play
a captive creature, and a Queen to day.

Your Morals (Madam) are too serious;
Me thinks these Ornaments should elevate
your dumpish spirits. Think this Bed a place,
in which no Icie slipping chance has power;
A Kings safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.

No (Menthe) no, it is not the Bed of state,
nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
it is not the embracing Arms of Emperors,
nor all the Gemmes that so inwreath the brows
can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
as she should still be constant; O she is blind,
nor does she know her self where she is kind;
Those, those are Kings, and Queens, whose brest's secure,
like brazen walls, Lust's entrance not endure;
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
nor the unstable talk of multitudes;
Fortune serves such, they happiness command
more than all Lybia's gold, all Tagus sand;
as heaven has given us no more conspicuous things,
than form or beaury: so like a forward spring,
Nothing more short.

Madam, divine not of a change; Belief
is too too prone, in entertaining grief!

Our Lord attends, to enter in,
and surely sleep envyeth his delight,
for he sits heavy on my drowsy lids,
draw all our Curtains; sleep be guiles our ears.

Madam, good night, time helps suspicious fears!

Drop golden showers, gentle sleep,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which do us in protection keep,
Make this Queen dream of delight
Morpheus be kind a little, and be
Deaths now true Image, for 't will prove
To this poor Queen, that then thou art he;
Her grave is made in the Bed of love.
Thus with sweet sweets can Heaven mix gall,
And marriage turn to Funeral.
Turk, Amurath, slave, nay something baser,
King! For all airy titles which the Gods
have blasted man withal, to make them swell
with puffed up honor, and ambitious wind,
this name of King holds greatest antipathy
with manly government: for if we weigh,
It Is subjects, and not Kings bear all the sway.
Each whispered murmur from their idle breath
condemns a King to infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempseucosis of souls,
and nature should a free Election grant
what things they afterward would reinforme,
the vain and haughtiest minds the Sun ere saw,
Would choose it is Cottage in some Shepherds flesh,
nay, be confined within some Dog or Cat,
than (Antique-like) pranck in a Kings gay-clothes*
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more then all Kings, blessed liberty;
And without rumor might enjoy my choice,
not fearing Censure of each popular voice.
Poor men may love, and none their wills correct:
but all turn Satyrs of a Kings affect.
O my base greatness! What disasterous star
professed it self a Midwife at my birth,
to shape me into such prodigious States?
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
and he from slander is at securest rest,
not that has none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtains; here is a sight,
that might commend the act of Love so Chaste.
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sun
weary o's task, and would entreat a day
of Heaven to rest in, here is a radiant Look,
that might be fixed in the midst oth' Axletree;
and in despite of dark conspiring Clouds,
she would outshine Sun, Moon and all the Stars.
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
mixing a kiss with every period;
Telling the Lillies how they are but wanne,
earth in the vernant spring is dull, and dark,
compared with this aspect! the Aeasterne air,
fanned with the wings of Mercury and Jove,
infectious, but compared with this perfume.
Hence then the ambition of that furious * youth, Alexis
who knew not what a crime his rashness was!
I might overcome more Kingdoms, have more dominion,
enthrone my self an Emperor oth' world;
I might, I might; Amurath thou might.
The Christians now will scoff at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to inchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! Tush, I Will to bed,
should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
prohibit me, or strike me in the act.
Talk on (vain rumor) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, coward!
should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
my bad would still survive all good be dead.
Eumorphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers
who have bestowed some happenssse on man,
to help to pass away this sinful life,
Grant me a youthful vigor yet a while,
full veins, free strength, complete and manly sense,
to know, and take a beauty most immense!

Amurath, Amurath.

Devil, Devil; what?
Dare thou appear before an Angel (Fiend?)

O Amurath, why does intemperate Lust,
raging within thy furious youthful veins,
burst through thy fathers Tomb? Disturb his soul?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
dreamed, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
heartbiting-hunger, and soule-searching thirst,
the never consumed, yet ever eaten prey
that the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
are not such tortures as our offsprings crimes:
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Ulcer, hark,
by the name of Father, and by all those cares
which brought me to my grave, to make thee great:
Thou that have nothing of me but my crown:
My enterprise surpast the boundless Sea,
cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
when the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groaned beneath my burdenous ships:
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
that Europe knew, and the fond Christians plague.
What coward blood ran flowing in my veins,
when thou were first begot, who marrest all
thy Fathers acts by thy untamed desires?
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lade thee:
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed,
be her lips poison, and let her loose embraces*
be venomous as Scorpions: If she conceive
a Generation from thee, let it be;
as ominous as thou have been to me;
Rebellious to thy Praecepts, printing cares
upon thy aged brows. O may they prove,
as Faries for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou can quench this flame,
if thou will cut this Gordian thread, and rend hence
that putrid Wenne which cleaves unto they flesh,
be all thine actions prosperous. Mahomet
shall be auspitious unto each design;
Fortune to show thee favor shall be proud,
Farewell. If what men do speak last before
they die take root, then dead men's should take more.

What, art thou vanished? Know (thou careful spright)
thou shall no sooner pierce the wandering clouds
with unperceived flight, than my resolve
shall expiate my former Vanity.
Look on thy son, thou airy intellect,
and see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turn thy breathing coursers back,
start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
this universal Globe, break every prop
and every hindge that does sustain the Heavens:
For straight must die a woman, I have named
a crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sex wisely considered, deserves a death;
For think this, Amurath, this woman may
prostrate her delicate and Ivory limbs
to some base Page, or Scul, or shrunk up Dwarf,
Or let some Groom lie feeding on her lips,
she may devise some misshapen trick
to satiate her goatish Amurath;
and from her bended knees at Meditation,
be taken by some slave toth' deep of Hell!
Thou Art a brave Creature, were thou not a woman.
Tutor! Come! thou shall see my well-kept vow,
and know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! Eurenoses! Captains, ho!

Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captains, welcome.
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My brest's too narrow to hoard up my joy*
Nay, gaze here Gentlemen! give Nature thanks,
for framing such an excellent sense as Sight,
whereby such objects are enjoined as this*
Which of you now imprison not your thoughts
in envious and silent policy.
My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
my sentence shall be free.
Euren And mine.

And mine.

Which of you then dare challinge to himself
such a pathetical Praerogative,
so stoically severed from affection?
That, had he such a Creature as lies here,
one, at whom Nature her self stood amazed,
one, whom those lofty ecstasies of poets,
should they decay, here't must nor barely dump
their dull inventions with similitudes,
taken from Sun, Moon, Violets, Roses;
and, when their ruptures at a period stand,
a silent admiration must supply.
Only name her, and she is all discrib'd.
Hyperbole of women, Color it self
is not more pure, and incontaminate!
sleep doates on her and graspes her eyelids close?
the sky it self has only so much blew
as the azure in her veins lends by refluxe.
Here Is breath that would those vapors purify,
which from Avernus choakes the flying Birds:
here is heat would tempt the numbed Athenian,
though all his blood with age were conjeal'd ye!
Now, which of you all is so temperate,
that did he find this Jewel in his bed
(unless an Eunuch) could refrain to grapple,
and dally with her? come! speak freely all.

Truly (my Lord) I came of mortal parents
and must confess me subject to desires;
freely enjoy your Love!
that were she mine, I surely would do no less.

What says Eurenoses?

My Lord, I say,
that they may rail at light, that nere saw day;
but had I such a Creature by my side,
were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
overcome by me, all volumes writ,
made clean and filled up by Rhetorique strains
of my great deeds, Historians should spend
their Ink and Paper in my sole Chronicle;
A thousand such alluring idle charms
could not conjure me from betwixt her arms.

Your sentence Ch^s-Illebeg?

What need your grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
which burden us with precepts so precise,
those parents, which when they are married once
and past their strength of years, think their sons straight
should be as old in every thing as they;
I say my Lord, did my head wear a crown,
that Queen should be the chiefest jem t'adorne it,
spite of all hate. That Is an unhappy state,
when Kings must fear to love least subjects hate.

Well spoke, three Milksops, Schahin. your sword,
Now, now be valor in this manly arm
to cut off troops of thoughts that would invade me!
Think you my mind is waxie to be wrought
int'any fashion? Orchanes, thy strength!
Here do I wish, as did that Emperor,
that all the heads of that enticing Sex
were upon hers, thus then should one full stroke
mow them all off.
there kiss now (Captains) do, and clap her cheeks:
this is the face that did so captive me:
these were the looks that so bewicht mine eyes:
here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
gave over fortune, victory, fame and all;
these were two lying mirrors where I looked
and thought I saw a world of happiness.
Now tutor, shall our swords be excercised
in ripping up the breasts of Christians?
Say Generals, Whither is it first?

For Thracia.

On then for Thracia, for he surely shall,
that conquers first himself, soon conquer all.

Thou sacred guider of the arched Heavens,
who can collect the scattering stars, and fix
the Erratique planets in the constant pole!
O why should thou take such solicitous care
to keep the air, and Elements in course?
That Winter should uncloth our Mother Earth,
and wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
that then the spring duly revives her still,
unbinds her sinews, fills her cling'd up veins
with living dew, and makes her young again.
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
to parch her flaxie hairs with furious heat;
which to allay too, thou op'st the Chataracts,
and water'st the worlds gardens with blessed drops;
can thou, which can sustain the ponderous world,
and keep it in true poize, securely sleep,
letting a Tyrant (which with a fillip, thus;
thou might sink to earth) to baffle thee?
A warrior in thy fields, I long have been
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanst to arm me with thy thunderbolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not; now he Giant-wise,
Dares thee again; pardon our earnest zeal
What ere's decreed for man, by thy behest,
He must perform, and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they do behold
an hardy youth encountering with a Bear,
or something terrible* then they give a shout;
so do thou even applaud they self to see
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often bears, and still rests true,
it is fence against all that after shall ensue.
Turk, i will oppose thee still; Heaven has decreed,
That this weak hand, shall make that tyrant bleed*
a man religious, firm, and strongly good
cannot oth^ sudden be, nor understood.

Rise (Soul!) enjoy the prize of thy brave worth:
Schahin, the Present that thou so professed,
should from the City of Orestias,
make proud our eyes! then tell me, Have thou slain
a thousand superstitious Christian souls?
made them stoop to us: O, I would bath my hands
in their warm blood to make them supple (Schahin)
that they may weild more Spears: our hands are dull,
our furie's patient! Now will I be a Turk.
and to our Prophet's Altars do I vow,
that to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
or in their throats my bloody Sword imbrew.

Then King, to add fresh oil unto thy hate,
and make it raise it self a greater flame,
see here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
before thy fatal hand, these impious slaves:
so long as numbers 's wanting to the sand,
so long as day shall come with Sun, and night
be spangled with the twilight dawning stars,
whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean,
shall Christians tremble at Turks thundering strokes.

So am I Amurath, the great King of Turks,
O how it glads me thus to pash their brains,
to rend their locks, to tear these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Stars I could reach you with my lofty hand,
it is well, enough, enough, (great Amurath)
for now I sit in Orchanes great Throne,
and sacrifice due Rites to Mahomet;
yet why enough? I Will on, and dung the Earth,
with Christians rotted trunks, that from that soil,
may spring more Cadmean Monsters to overcome them.
Captains, what Countries next shall we make flow,
with Channels of their blood?

To Servia (my Lord) there are troops of arms,
gathered to resist Mohammedan.

At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
the Countries as they pass, 'twere good we haste.

Why they do well! we like of their desire
to make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruin, destruction, famine, and the sword,
shall all invade them: Sun stay thou thy flight,
and see the sneaks in their own River drencht,
whilst with their blood our furious thirst is quenched!

Whither (Bulgaria) whither must we fly?
the Butcherous Turk's at hand. Blessed Sanctity!
if thou did ere guard goodness, wall our towers,
bring strength into our Nerves. For in thy cause
our Breasts upon their Rapiers we will run;
we'll with just hope confront the tyrants rage,
meet him in the face, fury will find us arms,
there is a power can guard us from all harms.

Let us be sudden: for we will not find scope,
to see our haps. Who most does fear, may hope.

Governor, Captains, have unto your arms:
the dangers imminent, and the Turk's at hand.

- (Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deep
in blood and terror?

Yes (Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and lucresse keeps baseness company.
Shall we not blush to see the register
of those great Romans, and Heroic Greeks,
which did those acts, at which our hearts are struck
beneath all credence, only to win fame?
and shall not we for that Eternal name?
To live without all credence, even to win fame,
is not to know life's chief, and better parts:
To us of future hopes: calamity
must help to purchase immortality.

Well spoke (trueChristian) they who still live high,
and snoare in praised applause nere know to bear,
a contumely, or check, or fate.
Wisely to steare a Ship, or guide an Army,
undaunted hardiness is requisite;
O then lets to our weapons! make him yield;
they which deny all right, often give't ith'Field.

Why (Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
nor need we turn our weapons on our selves.

You lazy rogue, what come in my Cabinet?

Conspiring slave, you murmured gan'st th'allowance,
and would persuade upon a larger pay,
to betray all Garrisons, and turn Turk.
Thou half Can-carousing rascal, I Will tear thee,
and those treacherous veins of thine. Will you see,
Blew-Jackets, will you see your Corporal wronged?
well, since I fight for victuals, for company.
Use now your swords and Bucklers.

Treason, the next man that speaks or strikes a blow.

Then shall our Laundresses fight for us?

Why, Amazons! Baudicans, come help to scratch.

O Cobelitz, what way shall we appease them?

Out, thy Corporal (huswife) has the itch,
you now will have foul washing. Drab, I Will tear your mouth:

An inch or two yet wider.

What, soldiers! think you each distasteful word,
given amongst your selves so strong an obloquie,
that revenge spurs you to each others death?
And will not seek to wash those blasphemies,
in Seas of their foul blood, which are belcht out
by our approaching foes, against the Essence
of the Eternal!

Leave, leave, these factions; cease these mutinies
Hark, their Drums take advantage of these stirs:
let us oppose our strength against our foe;
and in our Camp let not one Soldier be,
who will not find, and strike his Enemy.

Now (blessed guider and great strength of arms)
if in thy secret and hidden decree,
thou have not yet appointed the full time
wherein thou meanest to tame this Tiger,
who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slain now, there is victory in store,
which when thou please thou 't give, and not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
a funeral honor unto all the world,
when we are perishing, we will still believe,
those dangers worth our death we undergo,
whilst he, who is ours, is alike thy foe.
Should Fortune lose this day, when we are slain,
thou can give hands, and strength, and men again;
on thee we trust then, and on thee bear,
scorning for Heaven's sake to shed a tear.

Bassa, we thank thy valor and discretion,
in finding fit occasion to invade
the mutinous Christians! these Captives here
shall be good Presents to our worthy Master.

General, now trust me these young slaves,
be full of Valor, they have metal in them.

Yes: and to his Highness shall perform
a Service which I long have thought upon,
and when his Turkish Majesty requires;
they will fit to be a near attendant Guard,
on all occasions to the Emperor;
therefore they shall be called Janissaries,
by me first instituted, for our Princes safeties sake.

Their vigor and strong hearts becomes such service,
for to overcome them made our Soldiers sweat
much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight
with stubborn hard resistance, The Bulgarians
left the right wing; there set I forward first,
and like a torrent rolled destruction on,
raising huge storms of blood, as does the Whale
puff up the waves against a mighty Ship;
me thinks, I see the Rivers of their gore:
their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
the Body of their Army quite dispersed,
themselves all floating in Vermillian pools,
with their own weapons hasting to their death,
and such a slaughter did we make of them,
as Nature scarce can ere repair again.
One hastening to others death, pulling to ground
him that held up, so they each other drowned.

Still are they confident upon a power,
they know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
their precise souls from out the jaws of death.

Yes, such a superstition does possess them;
for when they looked for nothing but their fate,
and danger stood in sweat upon their brows:
they yet scorned Mahomet, and profaned his Rites,
and naught but horror made them to believe
so many men were fighting on his side,
as might have changed my seat, and part in the world,
(though Nature stood against) to a new place:
or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
or pull down Atlas with so many hands.

How like our Captains the last Victory?
(if any can prophecy of future things)
me thought I did dream of this blessed hap.
How fortune did involve them in their ruin!
and flight from danger, brought them in their ruin.
each one astonished with a sudden fear,
knew not the danger that was then most near.

To add more triumph, I present my Liege,
with these young Rebels, which you may bring up
in all the praecepts of our Mahomet.

And, (for great Emperor, your person wants
a thing which much ore-Clouds your light of state,
attendant Ianizaries to a Prince:)
these may be so trained up, as to supply
the duty fit for such a Majesty.

Bassa, we thank thy strength, Schahin your counsel
and to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
the German Ogly, he whose Scepter swaies
the Phrygian confines in strong Asia,
by Embassy entreats that he may join
his Daughter Hatum to our Bajazet.
Ambassador, here to our Counsel speak
your Masters Message.

Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
to be informed my masters will by me?
In wedlock if your prince may be combined
to the fair princess his sole daughter,
he freely gives the Phrygian territories,
and Bythinia to you for your dowry;
Cutas, Simon, Egregios, Sansale,
Abbettingon, the Ottomans estate;
which Ottomans, because he not endures,
the Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
to join with you in quelling their ambition

May't please your majesty to like mine advice,
it is good to have alliance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
the ancient Sage proposed unto his sons;
which whilst together they were close compact,
arms, knees, and his whole strength, could never break;
take one by one, they with a touch were cracked:
so Kings may be overcome that stand alone;
but two such princes, knit thus hand in hand,
should Nations totter they would firmly stand.

Yes Schahin, we'll approve what thou say,
then from us carry the great Asiaes Monarch
this our kindest greeting:
tell him, the gates of Prusa shall stand open,
and the glad air shall Echo notes of joy*
to entertain her who shall bless our Land
with hopeful issue; greedy thoughts expect
her soon arrival; and so (Ambassador)
inform thy princess, when she shall appear,
A lasting Starr shall shine within our sphere.

O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
each strives to have his own and others death:
And as though heaven conspired destruction too,
that rains down scalding Sulphur on our heads,
here one that lies thick gasping for his breath
is choakt with blood that runs from's fellows wounds;
whilst others for the dead are making graves,
themselves are made the corpse that do fill them.
Nobles, and base, together perish all,
and a drawn sword sticks fast in every rib;
our stones are died Vermillion with our blood:
old creatures that are creeping to the grave,
are thrust on faster.
Infants, but in the threshold of their lives,
are thus kicked off: Oh most disastrous times,
to love our deaths, and make our life our crimes!

See, see, the ruins of our goodly Walls,
our Cities smoke hinder the sight of heaven:
The conqueror yet amazed measures out our Towns,
with eyes of terror, and does scarce believe
he has overcome us, yet among these fires,
our dead men are denied their funeral flames:
And those infectious carcasses do perform,
a second murder on the rest that live;
and all the hope of safety that we have,
is now to fix our flattering lips at's feet:
mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.

Will you do so? speak, for I am determined --

No (worthy General) heaven avert
and arm you with the proof of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrify
all Christendom, and would not be beloved;
let not your fears give impious rage such scope,
as for to bring Religion to profaneness:
fortune and heaven will scorn to try a man,
that hurles his weapons hence and runs away:
How is he worthy of heavens victory,
that, when it frowns, dares not look up and see?
Me thinks we three are now environed round,
with hosts of Angels, and our powerful Mars
is putting bows of steel into our hands:
he does suggest our wrath, and bids us on.
O what an army it is to have a cause
holy and just; there, there is our strength indeed!
-- Tu mente Labantes,
Direge nos, dubios, et certo Robore firma.
If we must dye, the narrow way to bliss
shall be made wide for us: the gate's wide open,
and the spread Palace entertaines with joy.
Mean time, let us look like men upon our grief,
our frown fate Despot, Bulgaria, come.
Turk, once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must
command heavens favor in a case so just.

Sends our proud father-in-law this greeting to us?
was our sword sheathed so soon to hear this answer?

My Lord, he bad me tell you that 'twas you
have made him leave off this great Prophets wars,
when he was hewing down the Christians;
therefore submission should not now appease him,
no, though your wife, his daughter, should her self,
upon her penitent knees be supplyant.
No sooner shall the Tycian splendid Sol
open heavens Casements, and enlarge the day,
but his horse hoofs shall beat your treacherous earth;
and that you may be warned of his approach,
murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!

Confederate Princes, and my kind allies,
shall his proud nostrils breath those threats on us?

Moreover, my Lord will, or win, or raze,
Iconium and Larenda.

Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
had best look first, how safe his Prusa stands.
Lords, I am moved, and will forget my Queen
was ere the issue of his hated blood:
My spleen is tossed within, mine entrails pant,
as, when the Sea is raised with Southern gusts,
the wind allayed, yet still the waves will tremble,
Princes, now bind your selves with such strong chains,
your faith and breaths can make; swear to me all,
to be as firm to me against Amurath,
as is the skin and flesh unto the Nerves;

We all swear we will.

Then all here kiss my sword,
which shall be steept within the head-mans throat:
We Will make him know those will not fly in war,
which may in policy entreat a peace!
Have thy course (time) and soon reduce the year!
Lucan: -- Infestique obvia Signis
Signa, pares aquilas, and pila minantia pilis.
Ensigns may Ensigns meet, Carmania's King,
great Aladin, scorns to avoid a Turk.
Princes, and Neighbors, muster up your strength,
that we may meet him on his full Cariere;
and let it be Carmanian's pride to say,
to overcome him we ask no second day.

Thine O Hymen, thine is she,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to Marriage ties an Io;
Io to Hymen.
To thee Apollo is my suit,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing,
Io to Hymen.

When she is old, still seems she young,
When she is weak, to her be strong!
Be Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry cheer,
Io to Hymen.

You Gods of Marriage, sacred Protectoress
of lawful propagations, and blessed Love,
be most propitious to these grafted stemmes;
drop dewing showers of generation on them.
Think (Son) this day so prodigal of blessing,
as, that had Juno taskt thee (like Alcides)
to grapple with Stymphallides, or cleanse
Augean stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
sit like a Shepherd on Dardanias hills,
such a reward as this fair Queen repayes.
O thou hoped future offspring, spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender womb, these Ivory worlds,
in which a pretty people yet shall live
when you are born; O be within your limbs
the Gransire, Amurath, and fathers strength;
line their faces (Nature) with their mothers dye:
And let the destinies make the ensuing night
in their Eternal Books, with notes most white.

Grant it great Mahomet.

Most awful father, and my honored Prince,
although it be enacted by the heavens,
that in these bonds of marriage, such curse
attends on Princes above private men,
that no affection, nor home-nourisht Love
but state and policy must elect their wives,
which must be fetched from Countries far remot;
yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
both of their offsprings and their Kingdoms state.
That to what they ordain, they work in us
a sudden willingness to make's obey;
for in this breast, I do already feel
that there is a kindling a Diviner heat,
which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And if there be any felicity
from these united Loves to be derived
from the weak sex unto the husbands soul,
then may my Lord make his affection sure,
to be repaid with an untainted Love.
With soft and yiedling courtesy in all
he shall command, my willing arms shall still
be open t'enfold within a wives embrace,
if any comfort else there be in store,
(which modesty keeps silent to it self
cause only husbands and the night must know it)
my Loyalty shall ever all perform:
and though my Lord should frown, I Will be the same,
green wood will burn with a continued flame:

Princess, our ardour is already fired,
yet with no violent temerity;
such as might fear it is short and soon decaying:
thy virtue seems so to exceed thy Sex,
and wisdom so far to out-pace thy years,
that, surely (Princess) soon maturity,
argues in them hidden Divinity.
Expected Hymen here has bound our hands
and hearts, with everlasting ligaments:
Fortunate both we are, and have one bliss,
the want of which for ever does infect
with anxious cares the sweets of marriage beds:
our parents benediction and consent,
they are the truest Hymen's, and should be
to children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with such sacred charms
our last day of content shall never come;
till we must part by th'unresisted doom,
with a pleased error we will age beguile,
all stars on us, an equal yoke, must smile,

Now (Lords) who will dance
a Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunk;
and you now fix the sign of age on me,
you, who have blood still flowing in your veins,
be nimble as an Heart: Caper to the Sphaeres:
O you are light, that want the weight of years!

And health to our Bride and her father:
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
but that it would Phrenetique humors breed,
and so infect our brains with Superstition!

Auspicious fortunes to great Amurath:
to open more springs to this full-tide of joy,
know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
six daughters of six several Kings,
whose Cities we have equaled to the ground;
and of their Palaces did torches make,
to light their souls through the black cave of death.

Describe (good Captain) how the dogs were wearied.

So weary were they to endure our swords,
that by impetuous mutiny themselves
turned on each other, slew their Masters;
Childrens own hands tore out their fathers throats,
and each one strove who should be slaughtered first;
Here did a brother pash out a brothers brains,
some in stinking Quagmires, and deep Lakes
(which they had made t'avoide their excrements)
ran quick, and in the lake lay buried.

Good Executioner of our most just wrath!

Nor did it leave till death it self was weary,
murder grew faint, and each succeeding day
showed us the slaughter of the day before.
Amongst carcasses and funerals we stood,
denying those that lived such Ceremonies
as in their Temples to the Indian gods,
with prayers and vows they daily offered:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
till they had nothing for to work upon;
for, of so many souls that breathed of late,
these six are all remain: which as a Pledge
of my best service to your Majesty,
I here am bold to yield an offer.

Nor shall this present be unrecompenced;
for thy true service, on thee I Will bestow
all the rich gifts, which all these Asian Lords
brought to adorn these happy Nuptials;
on you fair Bride, great Princess, and our Daughter
do we bestow these Virgins (daughters to Kings)
for your attendance.

We are two much bound unto our Princely Father

No (Daughter) no, we hope thou art the spring
from whence shall flow to all the world a King.
Captains and Lords, to morrow we must meet,
to think of our rebellious son in Law.
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
short wedding days make it seem long to night.

Here set we down our miserable load,
O Cobelitz, with whom is it that we fight?
With Lybian Lions? Or Hyrcanian Bears,
which grind us daily in their ravenous teeth?
The Tyrant (as it were destructions Engineer)
helps Nature to destroy the worlds frame quickly.

Alas, my Lord, that needs not, every day
is a sufficient helper to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
to bring things to perfection: and to oreturn
all thy best works, thou usest sudden force.
when man's an Embrio and first conceived,
how long it is ere he sees his native light?
Then born, with expectation for his growth,
tenderly nourisht, carefully brought up:
grown to perfection, what a little thing
serves to call on his sudden ruining?

Come Cobelitz, amongst those demolisht stones
we'll sit as Hecuba, at those Trojan walls:
our tears shall be false glasses to our eyes,
through these we will look, and think we yet may see
our stately Pinacles, and strong founded holds:
that which one hour can delapidate,
one age can scarce repair.

No sir, for nothing's hard
to Nature, when she means for to consume:
A thousand Oaks (which time has fixed in the earth,
as Monuments of lasting memory)
are in a moment turned to ashes; all
things that rise slowly, take a sudden fall.

What course now, Cobelitz? must we still be yoakt
to misery, and murder? We scarce have room
upon our bodies to receive more wounds,
and must we still oppose our selves to more?

Yes! We are ready still; a solid mind
must not be shook with every blast of wind.
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
to get them Mansions in the Spangl'd heavens
then a true firm resolve; the Adriatike Sea,
shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts
be sooner moved, than virtue from its aim.
Let us but think (when we so many see
enjoying greater quiet than our themselves)
how many have endured more misery;
Ilion, Ilion, what a fate had thou?
How fruitful were thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our grief, make our self glad,
to think of miseries that others had.

Ay, (Captain) ay; they that furnish thee
with sentences of comfort, never saw,
their Cities burnt, their Countries desolate.
It Is easy for Physicians for to tell
advice to others, when themselves are well.

Tush, tush (my Lord) there is on our side we know,
one that both can, and will our weak hands guide,
one that will strike and thunder; Giant then,
look for a dart! we must not appoint when;
mean while help to convey this burden hence.
Turk, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
corruption will give them spite of thee:
Nor do our corpse, such Tombs and Cavernes need:
for our own flesh, still our own graves do breed:
And, whom the earth receives not when they die,
heavens vault overwhelms them, so their tomb's ith'skie.

Besieged on every side? Iconium taken?
Entrencht within my foes my self must lie
wrapped in my Cities ruin. Turks come on.

Nay but my Lord, mean you to meet your death?
let us have our flight, and trust more to our feet
then words, or hands --

Why so much of our blood
is already spilt, as should the glittering Sun
exhale it upward, 'twould obnubulate
It Is luster, else to fiery Metors turn.
some counsel (Lords) he that is amidst the Sea,
when every curled wave does threat his death,
yet trusts upon the oars of his own arms,
and sometime the salt foam does pity him.
A Wolf, or Lion, that has filled his gorge
with bloody prey, at last will lie to sleep,
and the unnaturalst creatures not forget
their love to those whom they do know their own:
My wife's his daughter; since we cannot stand
his fury longer, she shall swage his wrath.
The boisterous Ocean when no winds oppose,
grows calm: revenge is lost, when it has no foes.

Why then (my Lord) array your self in weeds
of a Petitioner: take the Queen along,
and your two children; they may move his eyes;
for, desperate sores ask desperate remedies.

Go (Lords) go: fetch some straight. O heavens!
O fortune, they that lean on thy cracked wheel,
and trust a Kingdoms power, and domineer
in a walled Palace, let them look on me,
and thee (Carmania;) greater instances
the world affords not to demonstrate
the frail estate of proudest Potentates,
of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinacles
are still invaded with the prouder winds;
they must endure the threats of every blast;
the tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake
with evey crack of thunder; humble Vaults
are nere touched with a bolt: ambiguous wings
has all the state, that hovers over Kings.
I, I, this vesture sits my misery!
this badge of poverty must now prevail,
where all my Kingdoms power and strength does fail.
Why should not a prophetic soul attend
on great men's persons, and forewarn their ills?
Raging Boots does does not so turmoile
the Lybian ford, as Fortune does great hearts.
Bellona and Erynnis scourge us on;
should wars and treasons cease, why our own weight
would send us to the earth, as spreading arms
make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughter-man to pasture goes,
and drags that Ox home first, whose Bulk is greatest,
the lean he still lets feed: disease takes hold
on bodies that are pampered with best fare;
so does all ruin choose the fairest marks,
at which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts;
ambition made me now that eminent Butt:
And I that fell by mine own strength, must rise
by professed weakness; Buckets full sink down,
whilst th'empty dance in the air and cannot drown.
Come (Lords) he out of's way can never range,
who is at furthest; worst nere finds ill change.

Our hate must not part thus; I Will tell thee (Prince)
thou 'ast kindled violent Aetna in our breast,
and such a flame is quenched with naught but blood:
His blood whose hasty and rebellious blast*
gave life unto the fire; should heaven threat us;
know, we dare menace it; are we not Amurath?
(whose awful name is even trembled at)
so often dared by Pigmy Christians;
which we will crush to air? what haughty thought
buzzed thy presumtuous ears with such vain blasts,
to puff thee into such impetuous acts?
or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so frail,
as made thee covetous of so brave a death,
as this known hand should cause it? know, that throat
shall feel it strangled with some slave brought up
to naught but for an Hangman: thy last breath,
torn from thee by a hand that is worse than death.

Why then, I Will (like the Roman Pompey) hide
my dying sight, scorning imperious looks
should grace so base a stroke with sad aspect;
thus will I muffle up and choke my groans,
lest a grieved tear should quite put out the name
of lasting courage in Carmanias fame.

What? still stiff necked? Is this the truce you beg?
Sprinkled before thy face those Rebel Brats,
shall have their brains, and their dissected limbs,
hurld for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) it is fit
no spark of such a mountain threatening fire,
be left as unextinct, least it devour,
and prove more hot unto the Turkish Empier,
then the Promethean blaze did trouble Jove!
first sacrifice those Brats. --

(Dear father) let thy fury rush on me;
within these entrails sheath thine unsatiate sword,
and let this ominous, and too fruitful womb
be torn insunder, for from thence those Babes,
took all their crimes; error made them guilty,
'twas Natures fault, not theirs: O if affection
can work, then now show a true fathers love;
if not, appease those murdering thoughts with me:
For as Jocasta pleaded with her sons
for their dear Father, so to a Father I
for my dear babes and husband; husband, father,
Which shall I first embrace? Victoriors father,
be blunt those now sharp thoughts, lay down those threats,
unclasp that impious Helmet; fix to earth
that monumental Spear, look on thy child
with pardoning looks, not with a warriers eye:
Else shall my breast cover my husbands breast,
and serve as buckler to receive thy wounds.
Why do thou doubt? Fear thou thy daughters faith?

I fear, for after Daughters perjury,
all Laws of Nature shall distasteful be;
nor will I trust thy children or thy self.

No Father, it is I: fear you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you war;
so that it is best with him that is overcome.
O let me kiss (kind father) first the earth
on which you tread, then kiss mine husbands cheek.
Great King embrace these babes, you are the stock
on which these Grafts were planted --

True, and when sprouts do rob the tree of sap,
they must be pruned.

Dear Father, leave such harsh similitudes:
By my deceased Mother, (to whose womb
I was a ten months burden:) By your self,
(to whom I was a pleasing Infant once)
pity my husband, and these tender Infants.

Yes, to have them collect a manly strength,
and their first lesson that their Dad shall teach them
shall be to read my misery.

Stern Conqueror: but that thy daughter shows,
there once dwelt good in that obdurate breast,
I would not spend a tear to soften thee.
Thou see my Countries turned into a grave:
my Cities scare the Sun with fiercer flames,
which turn them into ashes, and my self
so flickt and carved, that my amazed blood
knows not through which wound first to take it is way;
if not on me, have mercy on my babes, --
which, with thy mercy thou may turn to Love.

No sir, we must root out malicious seed:
nothing sprouts faster, than an envious weed!
We see a little Bullock, amongst an Herd
(whose horns are yet scarce crept from out his front)
grows on a sudden tall, and in the Field,
frolicks so much, he makes his Father yield.
A little Twig left budding on an Elm,
ungratefully bars his Mother sight from Heaven!
I love not future Aladins.

Threat all a Conqueror can, can threat but death,
and I can die: but if thou would have mercy! --

Let Us see your feet, we are proud with this hands kiss!
The higher those great powers have raised you,
press that which lies below with gentler weight:
to pardon miseries is Fortunes height:
alas, these infants, these weak sinewed hands
can be no terror to these Hectors arms!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joints
to ask for mercy; learn your lisping tongues
to give due accent to each syllable:
nothing that Fortune urges to, is base;
put from your thoughts all memory of descent:
forget the Princely Titles of your Fathers:
if your own misery you cannot feel,
learn thus of me to weep, of me to kneel.

Do (boys) and imitate your Parents tears,
which I (like Priam) shed, when he beheld,
Hector thrice dragged about the Trojan Walls.
He that burst open the Gates of Erebus,
and roused the yelling Monster from his Den,
was conquered with a tear. Great Monarch learn,
To know how dear a King does weeping earn.

Good Grandsire see, see how my Father cries!

Good Mother take my napkin for your eyes!

(Good father) hear, hear how thy daughter prays!
Thou that know how to use stern Warriers arms,
learn how to use mild VVarriers pity too.
Alas? Can ere these ungrown strengths repair
their Fathers battered Cities? Or can these,
these orethrown Turrets? (Iconium) what small hopes
have thou to lean upon? If these be all?
Not half so mild has our misfortune been
that any can ere fear us: Be pleased --

Rise (my dear Child) as Marble against rain,
so I at these obedient showers, melt;
thus I do raise thy Husband: thus thy Babes:
freely admitting you to former State.
But Aladin, wake not our wrath again;
"Patience grows fury that is often stirred;
when Conquerours wax calm, and cease to hate,
the conquered should not dare to reiterate.
Be thou our Son and Friend.

By all the Rites of Mahomet, I vow it.

Then, for to seal unto you this our love,
your self shall lead a wing in Servia,
in our immediate Wars; we are to meet
the Christians in Cassanoe's Plains with speed:
Great Amurath nere had time to breath himself,
so much as to have warring with new Foes;
no day securely to his Scepter shone,
but one Wars end, still brought another on.

Let now victorious wreathes ingirt our brows,
let Angels 'stead of Soldiers wield our arms
against him, who that our Cities might be his,
strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But look, look in the air (me thinks) I see
an Host of Soldiers brandishing their Swords;
each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
to nail these impious forces to the Earth.

Soldiers stand to it, though fortune bandy at's,
let us stand her shocks, like sturdy Rocks in the Sea,
on which the angry foaming Billows beat,
with frivolous rush, and break themselves, not them;
stand like the undaunted countenance oth' sky,
or, like the Sun, which when the foolish King,
thought to obscure with a cloud of darts,
out looked them all, our lives are all enchanted,
and more invulnerate than Thetis Son.
We shall have hands and weapons: if the stone
of Fortune glide from under our weak feet,
and we must fall, yet, let all Christians say,
It Is She, and not the Cause, that wins the day.
We must believe Heaven has a greater care
of them, whom Fortune does so often out dare!

Gentlemen, Brothers, Friends, Soldiers, Christians,
we have no reason to command of Heaven
a thing denied to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impudently proud,
as in this weak condition to repute
our selves above the stroke of Lady Chance,
a caution must divine it, ever fixed,
that whilst her checks equally fall out,
community should ease their bitterness.
I could afresh now shed those Princely tears,
to think such sudden ruin should attend
Heroic spirits glittering in bright arms!
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreams
disputed subtly by Philosophers,
to prove innumerable extant worlds)
was struck with pensiveness, and wept to think
he had not yet obtained one for himself;
what terror can affright a Christians thoughts
who knows there is a world, at liberty
to breath in, when this glass of life is broke?
our Foes with circling fury are intrencht;
Pelions of Earth and darkness shall orelade them,
whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
shall be yet ponderous to depress them lower.
Nay, my Enthusiastic soul divines,
That some weak hand shall from the blazing Zone
snatch Lightning, which shall strike the snarling Cur
with horror and amazement to the Earth,
which Hell cannot oppose! Turk, Tyrannize,
stand, yet at length to fall my sacrifice.
Super Olympic vigor will (no doubt).
squeez all thy supercilious rancor out!

Who set the world on fire?
How now (ye Heavens) grow you
so proud, that you must needs put on curled locks,
and cloth your selves in Periwigs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
command the puny-Christians demi-God
put out those flashing sparks, those Ignes fatui,
or i will unseat him, or with my Looks so shake
the staggring props of his weak seated Throne,
that he shall find he shall have more to do
to quell one Amurath, than the whole Giant brood
of those same Sons of Earth, than ten Lycaons.
Do the poor snaks so love their misery
that they would see it by these threatening lights?
Dare ye blaze still? I Will toss up Buckets full
of Christians blood to quench you: by those hairs
drag you beneath the Center: there put out
all your presaging flames in Phlegeton.
Can you outbrave me with your pidling Lights?
Yawn earth with Casements as wide as hell it self.
Burn heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames,
wake pale Tisiphon, spend all thy snakes;
Be Eacus, and Minos, as severe
as if the Goal delivery of us all
were the next Sessions. I Will pull Radamant
by his flaming furs from out his Iron Chair.

Horror, dismal cries, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee fore-tels,
Furies sent of thee to learn
Crimes, which they could nere discern.

Furies sent, etc.

O Amurath thy Father's come,
To warn thee of a sudden doom,
Which in Cassanoe's fields attends
To bring thee to thy hellish friends.

Which in Cassanoes, etc.

Megaera and Ennio both do stand
Trembling lest when thou art damned,
Chief of Furies thou should be,
And they their snakes resign to thee.

Chief of Furies, etc.

Terror, we a while will leave thee,
Till Cocytus Lake receive thee.
Cerberus will quake for fear
Where he a new Turks fate shall hear.

Cerberus will, etc.

Now who the devil sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no task else to set them too?
He should have bound them to Ixions wheel,
or bid them roll the stone of Sysiphus:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not please me!
Have they not been so drunk with Lethe yet,
as to forget me? They can portend no ill;
for, should the fates be twining my last thread,
yet none durst come from hell to tell me so.
Shall I be scared with a Night-walking Ghost;
or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can look more terrible then night,
and command darkness in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start, and draw back her head
to wrap it in a swarthy veil of clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphur, you prodigious skies,
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Aetna,
then vomit them at once; should Christians
couch to the bottomless abyss of Styx,
or hide themselves under Avernaes shade,
this arm should fetch them out. Day must perform
what I intend, wrath raines a bloody storm:
And now, 'gins rise the Sun, which yet not knows
the misery it shall see on Amuraths Foes!
Lords, Leaders, Captains --

Your Highness up so soon?

He small rest takes,
that dreams on naught but bloody broils and death.

Your Grace seems much distempered: Beds of sweat
bedew your brows with never-wonted paleness

Why; see you not? The heavens are turned Court Ladies,
and put on other Hair besides their own:
can guess (learned Schahin) what these flames portend?

My Lord, such things as these, we men must see,
and wonder at, and yet not search the reason;
perchance unwholsom fogs exhailed by the Sun
are set a blazing by his too near heat:
but it is not lawful that a mortal eye
should dare to penetrate Heavens secrecy.

Does it not bode a Conquest?

Yes, against the Christians:
for, unto them it bends sinister looks,
and frowns upon their Army more than ours.

So, so: come on, ere Phosphorus appear
let us to it, and so prevent that sluggard Sol.
If we want Light, we'll from our Whinyards
strike fire enough to scorch the Universe;
Mine Armor there!
Now (Mahomet) I implore
thy promised Aid for this auspicious day:
toss me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds:
If my Horse fail me, those fire breathing jades,
(which the boy Phaethon knew not how to guide)
will I pluck out from out the flaming Team,
and hurl my self against those condense Spheres,
on which I Will sit, and stay their turning Orbs;
the whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
but to behold me: Mine Armor, ho!
So, help on here; now like Alcides do I girt my self
with well knit sinews, able to stagger Earth,
and threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broyl remain to come
in future ages, set on foot this hour.
How well this weight of steel bents my strength!
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and do fear
(when I am armed) another Phlege^'s near.
Chiron shall see his Piadus at my feet;
And i will climb up to heaven, and pull it down
and kick the weighty burden of the world,
from off the Babies shoulders that supports it.
for I am safer Buckled against my foe,
then sturdy Jason, who by the enchanted charms
Medea gave, encountered Unicornes,
Queld Lions, struggled with fire-belching Bulls,
obtained a glorious prize, a Fleece. A Fleece
dipped deep in tincture of the Christ'ans blood
shall be my spoil; nay should they hide their heads
in their Gods bosom, here is a sword shall reach them.
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
when boiling blood is stirred in Amurath.

Here, mighty Prince, take view of Victory,
and see the field too narrow for thy spoils.
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
to see a slaughter she durst never hope for.
Earth has the Carcasses: and denies them Graves,
and lets them ly and rot, and fat her womb,
scorning to be unto the slaves a Tomb.

Where are become those ominous Comets now?
What? are those pissing Candles quite extinct?
leave their disacterous snuffes no stench behind them?
it is something yet, that their God sees their slaughter,
lending sulphurious Meteors to behold
the blessed destruction of these Parasites.
I knew the Elements would first untye
the Nerves of the Universe, then let me dye.

See (King) heres's one worm yet that dare confess
he breaths and lives, which once this hand crushed down.

Ha, ha, by Mahomet, and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleep.
It will a Lawreat prove to this great strife,
amongst all these murdered to give one his life,
so we'll descend.

From what a dismal grave am I awaked,
entombed within a Golgatha of men!
Have all these Souls prevented me in bless,
and left me in a dream of happiness?
But soft! me thoughts he said he would descend!
Then, Heavens, one minutes breath, that is all I ask,
and then I shall perform my life's true task.

Poor slave, would live?

Yes Turk to see thee dye.
Howl, howl, grim Tartar, yel (thou grisly Wolf)
force forth the blood from out thy gaping Wound!
Dii tibi non mortem, quae cunctis poena paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tuae dent (impie) morti.

My spirit makes me not to feel thy weapon!
Hold, you cracked Organs, of my shattered life,
I 'm not touched yet; can I not mock my death,
and think it is but a dream tells me I 'm hurt?
Dare thou then leave me (blood?) Can be so bold
as to forsake these veins to flow on Earth?
And must I, like the unhappy Roman, dye
by a slaves hand?

Tyrant, it is known
He Is Lord of others lives that scorns his own.

I that could scarce ere sleep, can I ere die?
And will none fear my life when I am dead;
Tortures and torments for the murderer.

Ha, ha, ha!
I thank thee (great omnipotent) that I
shall here laugh out the lag end of my life!

Villain, thy laugh wounds worse then did thy Dagger.
Are you Lethargick (Lords) in cruelty?

Nay, hear me (Turk) now will I prompt their rage:
Lock me up in the Bull of Phalaris,
cut off these eyelids, bid me then out-gaze
the parching Sunbeames; flea this tender skin,
set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
let the Siconian Clouds drop brimstone on me,
power boiling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
put on my shoulder Nessus poisoned shirt,
bind all these bloody faces to my face,
Rack me, Procrastes like --

Hell, oh! I cannot brook your smallest touch.

Ha, Ha! each groan is Balsome to my wounds:
I am perfect well.

Rascal, dare deride us?

Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
for me some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then free flight my new rewarded soul,
and seat thee on the winged Seraphims,
have to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
shall be an Haleluia, anthem'd forth
By the Chorus of the Angell-Hierarchy.
Pierce with swift plumes, the concave paths oth' Moon
Where the black air enlightened is with stars.
Stay not to wonder there at wandering Signs,
at bi-horn'd Gemini, or Amphions Harp,
at Arctos, or Boots, or the Bear,
(Which are to please wizard Astrologers:)
Soar higher with thy pitch, and then look down
to laugh at the hard trifles of the world;
Perchance some often have known a better life,
Never did one ere leav' it more willingly.

Fear your death (Gods!) for I have lost my life,
and what, I most complain, my tyranny.

Soul, to detain thee from thy wished rest!
were but an envious part! arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man,
would show I were unwilling yet to leave thee.
But dear companion hence: cut through the air
let not the grosenesse of my Earth ore-lime
thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime.

O, now have I and Fortune tried it out.
With all her best of favors was I crowned
and suffered her worst threats, when most she frowned.
Stay (Soul! a King, a Turk, commands thee stay.
Sure I am but an actor, and must strive
to personate the Tragic ends of Kings.
And so (to win applause unto the Scene)
with fained passion thus must graspe at death.
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull, fate, and do not overspread
Cimmerian wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soul to his Funeral?
Is not this hour the general period
to nere returning time! Last breath command
a new Deacalions deluge, that with me
the world may swim to his Eternal Grave.
Crack hindge that holds this globe, and welcome death.
Will thou not stay Soul? Friend, not stay with Kings?
Sink then, and sink beneath the Thracian Mount.
Sink beneath Athos, be the Brackish Waves
Of Acheron thy Tomb; I Will want a Grave;
So all parts fear, which first my Corpse shall have;
For in my Grave, I Will be the Christians foe,
here like a massy pyramide i will fall,
I Will strive to sink all the whole fabric with me:
quake pluto, for it is I that come
a turk, tyrant, and a conqueror.
and with this groan, like thunder will I cleave,
the timorous earth, whilst thus my last I breath.

O easy powers, to give us all at first,
but in their loss, they make us most accursed.

The Taper of your Fathers life is spent;
We must have light still and adore a Sun.
that next is rising; therefore mighty Prince,
upon your shoulders must the pondrous load
of Empire rest.

Why (Lords) we have a Brother,
who, as in the same blood he took a share,
so let him bear his part in Government.

My Lord, within the selfsame Hemispheare
It Is most prodigious when two Suns appear.
One body by one soul must be informed.
Kingdoms like (marriage beds) must not endure
any corrivall. Rome was nere secure
whilst she contained a Pompey; and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now,
so of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Laws, Prince be not nice
to purchase Kingdoms, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopt, send for him he must dye.

O happy Bajazet, that he was borne
to be a King when thou wast Counselor.
Call in our Brother Jacup.

Why (Lords!) is Amurath so light a weight?
Is this the Trunk oth' Turkish Emperor?
Oh what a heap of thoughts are come to naught?
What a light weight is he unto six men,
who durst stand under Ossa, and sustain 't?

My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honor he has left,
and think you of his rising, not his fall!
Let your decree be sudden, here is your Brother.

Brother, I could have wished we might have met
at times of better greeting! Our father has
bequeathed to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
Nor have we leisure (yet) to mourn for him.
Brother, you know our state has made a Law,
that, he that sits in a Majestic Chair,
must not endure the next succeeding heir.

Yes, we do:
And, Brother, do you think it is crime enough
to dye, because I am son to an Emperor?

My Lord, we know there breathes in him that air
of true affestion, that he does much desire
you should be equal in his Kingdom with him:
But still when two great evils are proposed;
the less is to be chosen.

My Lord, your life 's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
millions of lives, and he that must rule all
must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speak, yet think them not our words,
But what the Land speaks in us! Kings are free;
And must be impatient of equality.

And is it eene so?
How have these Dogs fawned on me, lickt my feet
when Amurath yet lived! Felt all my thoughts,
and soothed them to the sight of Empyrie!
And now the first would set their politic hands
to strangle up that breath, a blast of which
their nostrils have sucked up like perfumed air.
Well brother well, by all men this is spoke,
that heart that cannot bow, may yet be broke.

Brother, you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which do fear the vulgars murmuring tongue,
Must also fear the authority of a King;
For rulers must esteem it happiness,
that with their gov'rnment they can hate suppress:
they with too faint a hand the Scepters sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
when 't is so near it may our Crown affect.

Then name of Brother do I thus shake off,
for 't is in vain their mercy to implore,
when impious Statists have decreed before.
Yet King, although thou take my life away
see how I Will dye in better state then thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glory
May fall by some base hand: The Minister.
'To take my breath, shall be thy self a King.
Yet give me leave a while to Prophecy.
You that so Puppet-like delude your hopes,
and Wyer-draw the ancestry from Kings,
thinking, that fates dare not aproach your blood
till they do seize you, then you leave this Earth,
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragged;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
and with such shifts you do deceive your selves,
as if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) not all the Glow-worme state,
which makes thee be a Horse-leach to thy blood,
Not all the Parasitest' Minions thou maintainst,
nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Not all thy shifts and tricks can cheat mortality,
or keep thee from a death that is worse then mine.
Should all this fail, age would profess it self
a slow, but a sure Executioner.
O it is a hard thing well to temperate
decaying happiness in great estate.
But this example by me may you gain,
that at my death! not of Heaven complain.
Pull then, and with my fall pull on thy self
Mountains of burdenous honor, which shall curse thee.
Death leads the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dare command.

Take up this Trunk; and let us first appoint
our Fathers, and our Brothers Funerals.
the sense less body of that Caitiffe slave,
hurl to a Ditch. Posterity shall hear
Our less ill Chronicled, but time shall hear
these minutes rather, then repeat their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee I Will mediate,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blessed estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funeral day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honors can
Vex him, but dies a primare ancient man.
What greater powers threaten inferior men,
a greater power threatens him again:
And like to wasted Tapers Kings must spend
their lives to light up others: So all end.


