ALl Legions broke from Hell, all Fiends to day
Task'd for to work on earth, and to obey
Goetian spells, what stars foretell the event
Of hidden things, and future detriment,
Earthquakes that shake us to believe and fear,
Or more portentous spectacles in the Air,
All Circles drawn, Charms writ in Virgin-parchment
Are here all turned to comfits and sweet Marchpent.
You are welcoome Gallants to a merry Ghost,
You know a playing one, his sign's on the post,
Raised by a waggish Scholar in the Town,
Only to affright a Citizens Breeches down:
And give you all a caution on your lives,
To get strong Points, but weak and gentle Wives.
But if I linger, I shall be accessory
To a murder here; and yet in faith I Am sorry;
For 'bout those Breeches I have much to say;
Sit still, and merrily feed on the Play;
It Is City-chear, and stead of Wine pray laugh,
And with your money we your healths will quaff.

THe early star has cheered the chanting Cock
And taught his wings to be the Country Clock,
The chirping Birds salute him with their notes,
Tuning his welcome in their warbling throats,
The gloing Marigold with other flowers
Prepare their scents to dress the sun-fresh Bowers:
The winds soft whistlings bluster against the Trees,
Saluting Titan with the humming Bees;
All these adore thy beauty, I alone
Admire thee but for meditation.
Hah! has the Moon to night wept bloody tears?
A wounded man! Saints shield me from all fears.
Who is it? Disguised too? I know the cause
For dread of the Edict and our strict Laws
Against Duels now proclaimed. My charity
Shall give his body burial by me.
Rash men when on false honor wings they fly
Out-glide their path, and thus to ruin hie.
Procus well met thou art going to the Wedding:
Give me thy hand, thou art bobb'd as well as I.

Yes faith, thank Cupid and my own neglect.
Since I have left Coaches, and poudring of my hair,
And took delight to trace the populous streets
In my huge Boots, red Cloak, and my long Sword:
She never looked on me, Pox on all
Base affectation and practicing big looks,
'Tas quite undone me, and thrust my Mistrisses eyes out
Here Is the other Fisher that has mist the Eel too.
Good day Valerio.

Like to the transformed Procus.

That Is no where but in's looks, now trust me Sir.

Well, this Octavian has cozened all o'us:
Prithee let us study something for revenge.

But not in the military way.

O fie, hang it.


A baudy song, and Procus shall bear the burden.


Faith, now you talk of a baudy song, my Rivals,
What think you of a Randevous to night
At fat Erotia's the Curtezans.

How soon my thoughts are back on by the Devil.
Why I was musing what to do to cool me,
For my conceit of happiness in Aurelia --
Well, thank my temper, and the Edict come forth
Against Duels, blithe Pinnerio, thou had else;
For being Rival to my lust and Mistress,
Been earth by this. But to the Whore again.

I thought thy anger would end in such a trifle.

But is she cheap and tractable my Lads.

Troth that is a question too. Who has any money?
Pox on laced handkerchiefs, and amorous Rings,
They have beggered me.

And broke thy very Purse-strings,
With hiring paltry Poets to make their Poses.

Still Fiend do vex me?

O the Wench, the Wench.

I prithee pardon me, I had forgot the Doxy.

Faith, then I Will tell you, for money, Gentlemen,
I Will give my word and promise for your credits.

O my dear Idol.

Nay pox hinder him.

Then my Blades -- but you shall keep it secret.

May we turn Eunuchs if we do not, and never
Piss when people look on us for modesty.

Why then a Maid, a Virgin, a fresh Rose,
A sticking Paracelsa.

Who who, nay who?

Quish like a Codling Procus in thy arms.

Nay, nay, dear Idol, prithee who is it?

Pish, thou art so tyrannical, Pinnario.

Marry, a Fox-glove Lads of my presenting:
A handsome Lass that wanted means and money;
Whom I commiserating did prefer
To Erotias handling, and I know by this
Is taught to tumble with dexterity,
Look, look, our other Rival, old Philarchus.

Stint, stint your pace, you Rascal, you Plodd on
As if I went to my Aurelia's bed.

Vengeance oth' stone, and weather-beating Colic,
Before she cheated the old Sponge, he would wriggle,
And throw his Gout-bound Legs a mile before us;
Nay, kiss his rough Lips smooth upon her hands
Ere we could overtake him. Slight cannot you see?

Catarrhs consume thee, justle an old man.

An old man, and going to be married?

Aged, and get a Maidenhead to night?

I must give way, there is no striving here.

The Friar! what makes he here?

To all good morrow.

Dee hear my Ghostly Father, may I dispense,
And for all my yesternights Confession
Stew out that heat Aurelia's love has kindled.

What means my Son?

A wench, a wench, my Father.

Away.

Why good Father?

O poor Octavian!

Why, what of him? he is not married yet!
We that were his Rivals mean to present him
With a Song.

Alas, alas, he is slain.

Who, who?

Mum, mum, good Friar, mum, say nothing.
Pox of all whores and meetings. Sweet Aurelia.

Father, you sigh, who is it I pray is slain?

The Bridegroom Sir, and by Aurelia's brother.

My dear friend Babilas, who told you this.

I Sir, who saw young Babilas this morning
With frowning looks come to my Masters Chamber,
And call him forth, since when I never saw him.

Where found the Friar Octovian?

Walking abroad
To taste the sweetness of the mornings air,
Hard by my Cell I found his breathless body.
I took him up, and from him now am come
To acquaint his father with the heavy news.

Nay then Aurelia, have at thee once again.

Valerio thou art unhappy to thy friend,
Babilas coveting his sister for me
Thought to make way by young Octavians death,
Which he has now performed. What shall I do?
Aurelia for her brothers sake will hate me,
She knows he loved me dearly. Well, I Will in too,
And win Aurelia, or find out Babilas.

Hold, hold my sides, O I shall burst, hold, hold.
O constant thrift, that never leaves that man
Who honors thee. Aurelia's father's mine,
He always wished his daughter to my bed;
And though her amorous tears prevailed with him
For young Octavian, yet when he hears he is dead,
He will replant me in Aurelia's heart.
Yes, jeer and flout me my young Rivals, do,
You Will find at last, the old Fox has cozened you.

Nay Senio, noble Senio, let me find favor.

This rudeness Gentlemen becomes you not,
Pray give me leave that my Indulgency.
May choose one for my Daughter, not your claimours.

If I am not the handsom'st I Will be hang'
And like Octavian Pox of my oregrown Boots.

Nay, she is mine that is certain, I heard her swear once.
Next to Octavian she admired me.

Many fair years crown the most honored Senio.

Most Grave Philarchus. I, here is a man indeed!
Who wears sobriety upon his looks.
Whom thrift has worm'd so well, that he will last
When all these Grasshoppers are shrunk to nothing,
I wish Aurelia his, and none but his.

I am sorry for your sadness.

I Philarchus.
This it is to love for handsomness and honor:
Had she chose you, she might have smiled, not wept.

That yet may be performed if you consent.

She is to full of grief and will not hear.

She Will not deny her Father for duty sake.
Besides, behold how many gaping Wolves
Grin with false hopes of her retired favor,
Whom if she has, she is beggered and undone,
I am sure, and can in the rough Winters want,
Pave all my path with Gold. Your Wedding dinner
Is now prepared, and a full Table met.
Cousin, not all our expectations:

Enough, I am resolved. My noble friends,
I do perceive you all do emulate
Each others fortune. Speak, are you content
To let me choose a Bridegroom for my Daughter.

And hear it with delight and willingness.

Then before all these, as witness of my gift,
I here consent and freely do give up
My Daughter to the thrifty Grave Philarchus.

Philarchus.

That humming Drone.

That rotten Medler.

Nay Gallants, repine not, 'twas your consent,
Nor shall yea yet discourteously return
Without some recompense; we therefore both
Entreat your company would honor as
At the Wedding dinner, which I intend this day.

Shall we expect you

Yes with all our hearts.

These damned Boots, Aurelia had been mine else.

What comfort Daughter, come, you must forget
Old grief, and dress your Maiden smiles again
In Amorous blushes, to embrace Philarchus

Is he the man then?

Such is your Fathers pleasure.

You Friar contracted me and my Octavian.

Yes, that all these can witness, I did contract ye.

But now sweet Girl, my only joy and comfort
(Since Babilas is gone) thou art alone
My staff to lean on in my drooping age,
Oh do not slide away and make me fall
In grief as well as years, but give consent. --

To marry old Philarchus, I consent
And would 'twere done to night, within this hour.

Can you so soon forget my lost Octavian,
And bury all your love in's grave with him?

Sir, you must pardon me, you are too busy!
Your Son is dead, and your interest lost there:
She Is still my Daughter, and shall prosecute
What I command, or else disclaim her Father.

Forgive me Sir, my grief alas did move me,
My grief for two lost Sons.

Two Sons! why my friend, and the mad Rogue Dauphine,
Your young heir now, is not departed too?

He is indeed departed, for when he heard
Of my Octavians death, and by whose hand,
This day he left my house, and vows to search
The flying Babilas throughout the world,
In the revenge of his unhappy brother.

Good fortune after him, it is a valiant witty Rogue:

Hah, whose that stalks and figures on the ground
As if he conjured and invoked the spirits?

Pray be not angry on my wedding day Sir,
It is my servant, preferred by a noble friend,
And with such commendations and applause,
That I must beg you would please to entertain him.

Well I consent, come hither. What Is thy name?

Engine, Sir,

For water or for fire?

When you command for both.

Discreetly answered.
A new device comes in my head. Hark Engine.
Some few hours hence meet me in the Gallerie,
I have some Items to acquaint thee with.

With duty and observance I Will attend you.

Has a good thriving promising face believe me:
You Will not be wanting.

You must excuse me Sir,
My dead Sons body is to morrow interred,
I must contrive a little Ceremony.

We may remember you in a Bowl of Wine.

With my true thanks.

And our Confessor. --
Come my Aurelia. Honorable Rogat.

Thus the world goes hurrying on
Till wonders come never thought upon.
He who sleeps to night, ere day
Death inrobes with weeds of clay,
It Is a steady tottering state
Propt with Love and shook with hate.
Like that I now am musing on to be
Relator of a joyful Tragedy.

For look thee Engine, should her coy denial
Be once resisted by thy diligence,
And old Philarchus aided by thy power.

She fears if she consent not willingly,
We Will force her to my bed.

You hit me right,
But I will not drown your sweet ensuing pleasures
With more supposed fears. Engine the light
A long night and a happy to my Son.

Could I but blow away these humble Bees,
Time should deferr my wished delights no longer.
Oh, these court Blazers buz about my ears
And kill my heart, with poisoned jealousy.
Nay by this light we will wait you to your Chamber.

Hoida, a morris dance, and she the jester.

Thank you for that, not see you in your Chamber:
Yes, and there leave you with a kiss sweet Bride.
Do here if thou love me, kick him out o'th bed
And wriggle into his breeches.

You are merry Sir.

Then Venus may thou rule thy crooked Vulcan,
And let a Child of Mars rewhet this sword,
Upon thy smooth and Alabaster breast.

My good gay friends, is it not sleeping times.

Not yet with you these two hours Sir, I take it.

Two hours, has this dry weather-beaten Kix
Substance and strength to suck this Sugar Cane
Two hours, two minutes, and those coughing ones.

And yet these wrinckles put down your smooth faces.

Thank the dim eyes that made the election.

Gentlemen, pray remember where you are,
And who you speak to: it is Auralia's husband:
A Grave experience, thrifty Citizen;
And one that (by your favors) she is pleased
Without compulsion to smile upon.
Since you are cast off, it is indiscreetly done
(In my opinion) to laugh at your own shame.

What sword-man have we here?

His Poet man,
That made his Verses when he was a Suitor.

So, jear on.

And to night is hired,
To read the History of Palmerin,
Valiant Parismus and his loved Laurana,
To stir up mettle in this crumbling flesh.
What price my Geegaw, my Lute-string base and treble.

Yes, my good Beagles, I have a Base hangs here
Shall sing a deep note in your wanton bloods.

Let um abuse thy Master! to um Engine.

She against us too?

That Devil then be with her.

What recompense shall I reward thee with,
My best best Engine, savior of my life,
Inestimable Jewel, bright Aurelia.

Let me undress you Sir, the night grows late.

That Is my good Engine, untruss me, prithee untruss me.

And truss again, and make a Capon of him.

How Is that Aurelia? Be near me, prithee Engine.

What, is it the fashion with you Citizens
To have your man to help the Bride to bed,
I must have Maids, and will have, ere I stir
Or move a finger to undress my self.

Have patience but to night, thou shall hereafter.

Poison to night had fitter been applied:
Come hither and kiss me. His breath not perfumed neither.

You should have remembered kissing Comfits, Sir;
An old man's breath to a Virgin is unsavory.

Some Perfumes there, I shall be stifled else.
Engine, what see thou in his mouth? Look Engine.

I, Madam, what should I see? I see nothing.

He has borrowed sure a Cheek-pouch of some Monkey,
And stuffed it full with Bonds and interest money;
Look how he chews the cud upon um now;
A pair of Horns would fit the Monster well.

Nay, prithee Sweet, forbear these idle words,
And be more serious with him who loves thee.

More sottish and lie weltring with a Booby:
What dry skind monster would the Bore beget?

Let your wife get the supremacy at first,
Do, and be ever after in obedience
Tide at her Girdle with a silken string.
Slight, to her Sir, and since she will not to bed,
Let her know that you can do it up as well.
To her lustily, embrace her, down with her.

Help me then Engine.

How, two against one woman,
Dare you assume the name of Husband, Sir,
And not compel her to obedience?
Come, you are a man Sir, show her that you are so.

Show him a Basin to receive his Rheum,
And not my Lips; Are they Receptacles
To dry rank spittle, or drive away hoarse coughs,
To dissolve Burs, or whiten yellow teeth,
To exhaust phlegm, or consume Catharrs,
Expel the stone, or remedy the scurvy.

Engine, where art thou, wilt not help me Engine?

Remove the Palsy, or settle shaking Agues,
Unbend crookt bones, suck moisture from sore eyes.

Why Rascal Engine, wilt not help me Engine?

Troth Sir, she speaks but reason now me thinks,
And shows you a clear mirror to behold
Your own deformities, and her abuses.

Why she has converted him too. O my Temples.

Soft Sir, you are not touched yet to the quick,
Untruss him Mistress, that we may see the wound.

O Villain, Miscreant, will thou betray me?

Las, I but honor her for your sake Master,
You shall find me able and active in your service,
And without grunting get you lusty boys.

I am betrayed.

O beast, beraid, lets search him.
Sirrah help me, or I vow nere to kiss thee more.

I must obey your wife for your credit Sir.

Upon my wedding day, I Will teach you manners.

These breeches would fit you Mistress passing well.

Nay I will wear um, and he shall consent to it,
I Will stifle him with um else, Sirrah dee yield?

To what, to what, most dreadful wife, pray name it?

To let Aurelia be your sole Commandress,
Have the pre-eminence in all affairs,
To smile on all, kiss some, and dote on many,
To love, or lie with any, and not to grumble,

I do, I do.

Swear, swear, thou breechless Booby.

By my lost hopes.

Out with your Paper Mistress,
And write this down, you remember what he has said.

Yes, and shall call him to a strict account
To see it performed on Engine.

To give her license
On all occasions lawful or unlawful,
To ransack all your Coffers, and possess
Your Treasure for her use and maintenance.

Release me and to all I do consent.

The man does melt, forgive him Amazon.

His hand and he is free. You Will not renounce this?

My Religion sooner.

Kiss then and be observant:
Reply no word of thanks, I hate thy voice
Worse than the howling of a hungry Wolf.

Where will it please you he shall lie to night?

Here take my shield and then I Will tell thee.

O Engine, Engine, will thou serve me so?

Where she is pleased to place me I must raise
The house, nay you out of your bed to night
If she commands me.

Why, the withdrawing Room.

It Is too far from your call and from your eye:
Say you should want the Chamber Pot in the night,
He Would not be ready to do his duty to you:
I think your Closet fitter, Amazon.

There shield-bearer I have him under lock.

Amazon and shield-bearer, this is fine.

Dee grumble Tetworm?

Not I Amazon.

Spend not your breath on such a water-bubble, Come Sir into the Closet, you will
along Sir

Was ever man so cozened by an Engine.

In my absence (dear Valerio) be present with my sister, woo her, she is thine
by conquest, and Octavian's blood by my hand let out, has to thee resigned
her. If thou possessest what I hope thou do, send me word to Orleans, where
in a disguize I live undiscovered

Thine BABILAS.


If obscured there, then why not here as well?
The strictness of the Edict has power with them
As well as us, I want thee Babylas,
And I will have thee, or refuse thy friendship.

Pish, what a studying now Valerio?
Prithee put up and go along with us.

Whether, to the Tavern?

To the Tavern, pensive Rascal,
No, to the Down-a-down, the plump wench,
The quick eyed Lass Pinnario told us of.

What in thy red Mantle and those cloak-bag Boots?

Pinnario if thou love me talk not on her
Till I have mangled this VVhoresons tongue.

What, thou will not fight?

Yes, by this light will I.
I have commended my attire, praisd my trappings,
Yet never had good luck in um since I wore um,
Sure theyl do something when I have fought for um;
Come Sir, you that ride in Coaches, and contemn
Your foot-companions, I Will open your bosom for you.

The Boot thou meanst, why what an ass art thou
To quarrel thus with thy friend, thy wenching friend?

Why, there is the vice weakens virtue in the stomach,
With what a whimsie that wench comes round my head,
And stupefies and dulls my active spirits;
Give me thy hand; thou wilt to her with us then.

And from her too, so you will put off your Boots first.

Again that word, Pinnario let me go.

I Will give thee another pair.

Gifts may mollify.

Within there. Sirrah, fetch this Gentleman
My Velvet Cloak, and a pair of walking Boots.

Then may thou court her in a Method Procus,
And let her all that while rip out the lining:
It Is none of thine, Alas! thou needst not care:

Mass, and well remembered, let me see, not a farthing.

-- No matter, here is Apparel, Money, and credit.

Here, here, I these, these Boots will fit thee, come.

Faith, I think they will never fit you again.

What shall I do with these hides, pray Sir.

What hides, pray, Sir.

I cry you mercy Sir. I mean your Boots.

Why, hide 'um any where,
Drown 'um or anything, so I never see 'um.

I thank you Sir, I shall dispose of them.

I prithee do.

Come Gallants, shall we go.

But do'e hear, by this hand I Will take the Wall,
I Will make that bargain for my new Boots sake.

Fie, how this Procus still forgets himself,
And the old customary way he used.

It Is his red Mantle his led him to this error

Thou have forgot them, there are such things as Coaches,
Hang the Wall and Kennel, they will exempt from both.

This it is to have a drabbing humor, oh these damned Queans.

Come, come, we dally blades, it is very late.

We go Pinnario. Stay I had forgot.
Boy, here take my Keys and fetch me some guilt shillings.
A cheating way my Rogues that I have invented
To entice and cosen my night play-fellows.

Excellent.

Your hands, there is six a piece. My Coach there?

Softly, softly, thus far I am crept unheard:
If I but once escape your tallons Rooks
I Will wash, and rub, and scrub you too for this.
First, (let me see) I Will call her Father hither,
Then raise the City, all France too if I could:
Then to the Friar, he will make 'um confess all. --
Oh, I shall cough, I am undon, oh, oh,
This bur will choke me if I hoakt not up.
Hum, hum, uh, uh, uh.

It Is he, Philarchus.

Uh, uh, uh, uh.

I Will rise and terrify him on a sudden,
This sheet will dress me rarely like a Ghost.
Whose that disturbs this silent Room with coughs,
Or dares break open his barred doors to walk,
And trace the path of the departed Spirits?

The Devil haunts her too, what shall I do?

Be silent and to bed, and never more
Disturb the pleasures of this sleeping pair.

Oh no, I will not, what is thy name good Devil?

I am the spirit of slain Octavian,
Oh, I could tear thee in pieces, to think that thou
Durst think on that Aurelia with lust
Which was once mine, continue thy obedience,
For if thou do betray her, I will haunt thee,
And with pale apparitions vex thy soul.
Depart to bed, thy cold hug, not Aurelia.

Good Devil I am gone, how shall I do
I have forgot my way, befriend me darkness,
This way the closet lies I think. Uh, uh.

Who Is there, Philarchus.

Uh, uh, uh, uh.

Oh, that my shield-bearer could hear me now,
I Would make him ease the tickling of your throat,
His bed is not so far, but he may hear me.

Cursed mistake.

Hoh shield-bearer awake.

What ails my Amason.

Philarchus here.

How Is that Philarchus, nay, then put on the breeches.

Sirrah what make you here, confess, confess?

Conjure up the Ghost, he will reveal all he intended.

Oh, oh my heart the Ghost, dear wife forbear.

He calls me wife, call him up shield-bearer.

Oh I shall shakes to powder, I confess all.

Without premeditation quickly, come.

I meant this night to steal away and leave you,
Then raise old Senio, the Erier, Rogat,
And to conduct 'um hither to be witness. --

Of what, speak villain?

Of my imprisonment and --

Oh Dotard betray his Lady and Empress, the breeches.

Here Amazon.

Dear Imperiours wife take heed.
If you do wear 'um you are quite undone,
Las, I was cured of the dry scab last moon.

Well, hang 'um on the pole again, but hark you,
If you again conjecture any escape,
Or let your frowns discover inward anger;
I Will hang 'um here, here on thy horns deviser.

Oh misery, of a handsome wife, my forehead.

Well I Will to sleep again, watch you the Ferret.

Engine, come hither.

Your will Sir, what is your will.

Have thou indeed: lain with my wife to night
And don the feat for me? Nay, Shield-bearer.

Speak softly Sir, if my Amason should hear you,
You are lost for ever.

Why, what is the matter?

Softly, you heard us struggling in the night.

Oh yes, the bed did reel against my forehead.

Well you may think I am false, but it is well you spoke not.

Why, what, what projects, honest Engine tell me?

Why, some fears she had that you would discover us,
Which made her even this night intend to gueld you,
And then to swear she found you impotent,
I used what exhortations I could
In pity to your members, and at last prevailed
Something Octavians Ghost has told her since:
You had best take heed Sir, for he tells her all things.

The Devils Cuckold, die, die Philarchus.

Oh the sweet kisses she hung upon my lips,
When I had put Philarchus from her thoughts.
That barren piece of Earth where furrows are plowed,
That stubble fit for nothing but to burn.

So, now I am going the way of thriving Citizens.

Then with a thousand passages of Love tricks.

No more, no more, my lust begins to boil.

Why, I can help you Sir to cool't again,
So you will not grumble at what we possess.

One boon, and all is thine, my wife and all.

On that condition any thing, come tell me.

Beauty has wrought so on my flexid nature,
And so increased the flame I would suppress.

Oh, you would evacuate, is that all Sir,

Some simple harmless wench, thou know 'um all
Though of thy instruction, I shall not weaken her much.

Why now Philarchus speaks himself a man,
And will conform himself unto the times,
His vizard is fallen off, and he is become
A smooth young striker, active, full of spirit,
His knees grow straight, his staff with fury flies him
For fear of being arreign'd for killing those
His fatal hand shall threaten, his shoulders shrink
Into his marrowy back, his eyes fill up. --

No more good Engine, I am worse than Goat already,

Then for his wisdom an Isocrates.
He knows his wife (since she is young and handsome)
Must have her longings, but then he will have his too:
And whilst she sports at home, he will rut abroad:
For should he say his wife does Cuckold him,
The Town would jear him into age again:
Besides: the proofs and confirmations,
The Lawyers Fees, with the Attorneys bribes,
Would rip his bags up, shoal away his Gold,
Undo his thrift, and cancel all his Bonds.

True, Engine, true. Why, thou shall have a stipend
From all rich Citizens to be maintained;
That I should study to accuse thee Engine,
Who thus have saved my honor and estate.
Get me but wenches, and I vow nere more
To think upon Aurelia but as thine.

For should you mutter the disgrace is yours.

Thou have instructed elegantly before.

As soon as day expect one in the Closet;
Your wife with men, and why not you with women?

I Will bite thy ear thou Rascal, I will bite it.

You Will spoil your better bit Sir. Softly, softly.
My mouth waters at your bed. Aurelia,
Pox on these tempting courtesies. O that I could
Un-gentleman my self and break my trust:
But should I do so? Incest and faith together
Would lie so heavy on me, 'twould make me hang
An-arse, and then like hunting of the Hare
With un-breath'd Dogs, 'twill be but petty sport.

VVere't possible I could wish all were present.

It will be requisite, but how which way?

The way must be my invitation
To my sons funeral. How thinks my Father?

I think it reasonable, but then prepare
What ornaments are fitting for the Hearse;
We must use order in this undertaking;
About it noble Rogat, the sun begins
To show his rays and you have much to do.

Prepare we for Confession,
And our souls absolution,
What a world of horrid acts,
Heinous crimes, and bloody facts,
Whispering evils, secret thoughts,
Inward fears, and outward faults,
Big-mouth'd oaths, invented Lies,
Bitter Curses, envious Cries,
Shall this mornings night produce,
VVhilest I pardon Heavens abuse.
But some Delinquents will so blindly run,
They Will knock their brains out against Confession.

Cunicula.

My Patroness.

When jumbled you last Cunicula?

Not since the Ides of March.

A Roman was it not?

Yes, Patroness.

I thought so by the language he has left thee.
Let me see, how many practisings have you had now?

Some half a score.

Well said, thou scor'st um up:
Just of thy years did I begin this trade:
Ah, what discourse my beauty bred in the streets!
One said I was handsome, the other proper, witty a third:
Then the fine Broaths I daily had sent to me,
Potato-pasties, and lusty marrow-pies:
And then in the morning Pickled Oisters brought
To give my Muscadel and Eggs a relish:
Then my presenters armed with Pistolets,
Would drop down showers of bounty on my lap:
And then, Ah, ah, when I was young
The novelty was such a thing, Ah, ah.
Now I am old, and custom has deceived me.
Thou art still Cunicula full of juice and beauty,
Rejoice and hug thy time, thou will be one day,
To my grief I speak it, like thy Patroness?
One knocks, a Booty I hope, look out Cunicula.

O Patroness, silk Cloaks and silver Lace,
A Coach-full on um.

In and prepare your self.
Some youngster I hope that has bought new clothes,
And comes to say um here, weel make a-fire,
Which shall both air your suit, and melt your Gold:
Soon enough, soon enough, with what force
And eagerness they thrust in, but go out
As tame as sheep. Why what is the matter there?
Will you knock down my doors you saucy Jacks?

Erotia, sweet Erotia let us in.

Let ye in, who are ye, I am no such woman,
Would you should know it I.

It Is Pinnario.

My Benefactor, you must not be denide.

Why how now Souce, what shut the door upon us?
Have you not learned my call nor knock yet?

Sweet Sir,
I must adhere, I know your knock within,
Though, without, my age has dulled my ears too much.

Well, for my satisfaction salute these Gallants.

Sir, as I take it, I have kissed those lips before,
And yet me thinks I have fogotten where.

Familiar friends already: I knew when once
I had defide my Boots, red Cloak and Sword:
I should be adored. I feel my back a breaking.

Nor have I lost your memory delightful Sir.

No, if thou had, thou had lost the sweetest pleasure
Ere slept with thee tough Bombast.

Ah, dee remember,
Just this time four year, I, it is thereabouts,
The Catches we two sung in the back Room,
And how you laughed at me, when I said, you had forgot
To hold your Minnum-prick out. Ah you are a wagg.

But hark thee Souce, where is my preferred Damsel:
I have brought these Gallants here to see her (Bombast)
And to applaud my choice and care of her.

So, so, you will never leave this open dealing:
Why Cu? why Cuni? why Cunicula?
Thou insatiate Fawn, why do thou stay so long?

Morrow Fondling, morrow sweet young Fondling:
Well, be a good wench, and let Souce indue thee;
Thou have found a Patron will not let thee sink.

But dive a little into your Comrades pockets.

Sweet Nightingale your Servant, then your Lips.

That liberty must none of us be barred of.

Heart, a brave Lass, what a chop she has given my Lips,
And made their anguish fire my heart with love?

What think you Blades, how do you like my choice?

Prithee stand out oth' light man, Cuni, Kether,
I would I were your Hays, I Would hamper ye;
If I have a face to speak to this old stewed meat
I am a snow-ball, and that I am far from at this time.
I Will fee the Tar-box: Beautiful Erotia.

Smitten, smitten, on my honor, see they are at it

Why what an impudence my Cloak has lent him.

Hah, let me see the other pocket:
Vanished, all vanished, at such a time too.
Nay, if money be loft to buy virginity,
The devil and charity fly with it.

Nay Sir,
Your golden Coin and my Patient is yours?

Mischief, a little patience, and thou shall hav't.

How now Cock-master? what cowed already?

Yes faith, and bowed too. Do hear Valerio?
Thou must needs contribute four or five pieces more.

How?

Nay, prithee be not angry, faith thou must.

Why your gilt shillings?

Lost, Valerio, lost.

Nay, lose the cause, and lose the effect for me.

Logic at wenching disputations, absurd.
Pinnario, thou have a noble bounteous nature.
Faith, I have prevailed to hug thy fondling there,
And only want some customary duties.

Away thou Truant, out with thy cozening Doits.

Las, they are all perished.

Perished, how, which way?

Shall I tell thee this Valerio's a Quacksalver,
Hang him out side, there is naught but dregs within.

Why, what is the matter?

Has mixed some hungry poison
With His deceitful Gold, and it has eat through our pockets.

How? let me see; why, thou art deceived mad Procus,
Look you, he is mine still. Thou will not Cheater?

By this Gold but I will. Here, here, Erotia, here

Here Is but three Sir, my bargain was for six.

Pox on my clutches could not scrabble all.

Hark Souce, one knocks there I think.

Within there.

What intruders that?

I Would speak with the Lady.

Here Is none so worshipful.

With the Governess.

Govern your tongue, I Will wash your manners else.

Well said, Cuni.

Nay, prithee hear me Cuni.

No, not a syllable without the other three.

It Is Aurelia's Bobadil, her waiting Favorite.

Who, Engine, let us admit him and be revenged.

The Rogue that braund us in his Mistrisses Chamber.
Do hear Valerio, a man without offense
To your plush Cloak, may try his skill a little.

And tire it too. What makes the Cerberus here?

What shall I say to him?

Let him in first.
By that time weel invent his entertainment.

Shall's drill his eyes out?

Or make an Eunuch of him.

And swear we found him up to the ears with Souce.

Sir, this liberality commands my house,
What Is here pray call your own.

Defend me craft,
My enemies in rank against me. Then Philarchus
Some of your musty coin must buy um off.
Here, but remove these silken toys a while.

A Pander, a Pander, a Pander.

Your meaning Gallants?

First your chastisement Sir, and weel obey you.

Sirrah, you Janus with your double face,
That srowns on us, but smiles upon Aurelia,
We smell your cunning, Fox, and we will hunt you,
Till we have worried out your subtlety.

Sir, the good news I bring deserves not this:
Have I stretched out my ey-strings for your search,
Surveyed each street, each alley about the City,
To find you and the brave Pinnario out,
And do you thus requite my diligence?

Why, the fellow's made sure, what business have with me?

What shall I say? Now, now befriend me wits:
Sir, the Actors in my business are more than my self,
And one that loves ye Sir.

Aurelia may be.

Happy instruction. Sir, your ear in private.

How?

If I do lie, act on me what you threaten.

But why must Procus be my companion?

Why Sir, Philarchus has done ill it seems,
All curses plague him for it, for but for you Sir
She Would die oth' longings.

Why, why what is the matter man?

The hoary Ram nere lay with her last night,
Only lent her his Breeches to keep her warm,
And poor Heart what with expectation
And angry affliction, she is grown so fiery
That she is impossible to be quenched by one.
Hark you. There Is work enough for you both
These six weeks, though you turn your blood to marrow.

Souce, come, I have given thee many a Pistol,
Lend me some Gold to reward this trusty Servant,
This faithful honest fellow, or stay, Valerio
Prithee let us give him thy Cloak Procus has.

How Sir, my Cloak?

But hear you Gentlemen, pray what is the news?

Is this your friend Sir?

I Engine, an honest Hector, shall he along too?

Yes to his Grave when I can single him.
Sir, with your pardon, I have news for you too,
And that will make your heart swell high with joy,
I Will but dispatch these first, and then attend you.

How were we cozened in this honest Engine?
We thought thee our greatest Enemy alive.

Who Sir, I? truth defend me, but stay a while,
I had forgot that, you must shift Gentlemen,
And put on women's clothes, my Master else
(At whose name I tremble, he has so beaten me.)
Will be suspicious to your undoing:
Some old cast Gowns would secure all.

But hark thee Engine, where shall we find Aurelia?

Why in her Closet:
Knock thus, you hear, she will open presently.
Perhaps I may be there before you change,

Here Engine, take my Cloak, I give it thee:
Now are my arms at liberty to hold up my Coats.

Why is your appetite so slender Gallants?
Can you demur so long?

Away, away. Engine thou art so faithful.

Buy, Valerio, buy.

You Will sup with me to night?

We cannot promise.

So, now for you Valerio. Erotia
I have some private business with this Monsieur
Pray expect us in another Room a while.

Libidinous thoughts be with you. Come Cunicula.

Now Engine, what is for me to execute
About Aurelia, prithee let it be.

I have no other business than hers, Sir.

What, she expects me some where privately?

So, so, he will make the quarrel himself anon.
Sir, my fair Mistress, (so far have I prevailed) --

She has sent thee to bring me to her? Hah!
I do conceive, but do hear me Sirrah?
What, is she active and nimble in her dealing?

How Sir?

Pish come, thou art so modest now:
Faith, when did hug her last? I know thou have don't:
Here Is none but friends man.

Yes, a deadly foe,
And to raise courage in you first: take that.

Why, villain Engine?

My Mistress a whore, draw and defend your self.

Art thou so treacherous?
Thy blow base Groom has forfeited thy life.

Your prophecy proves false Sir.

Murder, murder.

Whore, open but thy jaws again, I Will split um,
Reply not, but hearken and obey me, if thou mutter'st
I Will carve thy skin into Escutcheons for his Hearse.

By all my fears, and all that is good I will not.

Let this confirm you, which if you prosecute
With fortunate success shall still flow to you.

Why this is a fee to make us fire the City.

If he be lost use all care for his concealment,
Then with your fair Disciple here, be sure
You meet me at Aurelia's house this night.

The hour.

About six, I must not stay, farewell.

Oh.

Fetch some strong water, quick Cunicula,
There may be hope of life. How do you Sir?

Who Is there? Erotia.

Yes.

Then I have dreamt.

Here Is the water Mistress.

So, so, take comfort alas how weak he is?
Fetch the back-water by my bedside, Cuni,
That will make him spring again, though his heart were dead.

Foiled by a Villain, my unlucky fate.

Slight what a mincing gate these Coats have taught me?
These she-comrades must needs be nimble-thigh'd,
They practice it in walking so.

What Is here, the Sign oth' Breeches?

I conceive it
It Is where Philarchus keeps his Sentinel,
We must avoid that path, there is Hell at end on it.

Engine most opportunely come, do hear
Where, where is the Closet? but direct us, then
Let us alone to raise the Hare and hunt her.

Yes, you shall hunt, and hang for hunting false.
You speak too loud, what mean you Gentlemen?
A Lion rampant does inhabit there:
Behold the Ensign of his desperate wrath:
The least suspicion of your presence here
Blows us to nothing.

Why, is he then so valiant?

A very Hercules, I Will tell you Sir,
One blow of his has so benumbed this arm
I must despair of life in it for these two days,
But I shall do you wrong, Knock there and enter.

Now could I leap through the door, but for Philarchus

Open fair Danae these golden Gates
And shroud delight within thy pleasant arms.

Thy Mars bright Venus does obey thy call.

Philarchus.

Yes, Philarchus can speak Lines
Provoked by Lechery. A brace of Turtles!
This Engine exceeds thy duty, come ye Puttocks.

Why Procus we are abused, a trick upon us.

Speak lower, if the purblind Ass will needs
Take us for whores, and so beguile himself,
Let us not cross his humor.

A match, be confident.

These Harlots have such enticing delays.
I must defer no longer. Come kiss me both of ye.

Pox of your bristles, how they bore my Lips.

Nay, now we have begun, no fumbling till we have ended.

Nay, good Sir, you will disgrace your self with us.

I, so you all say when you want a greasing.
I will endure no longer --

But you must.

Too loud, my wife will hear. I must ye Queans;
Get ye in to the Closet, go.

We Will be no prisoners.

Quench him now whilst he is hot, he will hiss again.

Ye Vagabonds, ye Harlots, out ye Strumpets.

My wife Aurelia, O my endless shame!

Good Sir bear up, would I could help you Sir.

A Constable, fetch me a Constable:
I Will have these Queans whipped round about the Town.

Why --

For your own credits discover not your selves
Should my Master see your breeches he would run mad.

Fetch me a Constable, I say, why go not?
Sirrah for your part I Will have your boisterous --

Stomach or any thing pulled down, dreadful wife,
I do confess and humbly ask thy pardon.

So, is he come?

Yes, those you thought not on. The Friar and Rogat.

My fit, my fit.

What will become of us Pinnario?

Become of us, why let us unmask our selves.

Peace Gentlemen, conceal, it was my plot:
But vex Philarchus for my sake this night,
And then I am yours.

Excellent rare wit!

Dee tremble Sir, there is remedy on coming.

I hear um coming. Dear Amazon, on my knees
I beg concealment but for this offense,
With my hired lewd ones here, and I vow hereafter,
Never to cross thee in the least attempt.

Madam, have mercy on his vanquished Gascoyns.

Shall I then pity thee? O thou vile --

No more, I will confess my self all base,
So you will betray us not.

In, to my Closet.
What now, I Will take a care for these. Farewell.

Sir, some occasions have called my Master forth,
My Mistress though will much rejoice to see you.

But we may see Aurelia then.

Yes Sir, there lies your way, if you please to enter.

For look you Gentlemen it was her policy;
For had not she devised some sudden terror
To affright Philarchus, his jealousy
Had interrupted all, but now our plot is sure,
He dares not now divulge it though he know it,
Least he betray what he would act with you;
But I am glad you shirk away so handsomely.

'Twas time I think. When shall we hear from thee?

I asked not that oth' Friar. About Supper-time.

Thou know Valerio's Lodging.

Why dee ask?

We sup with him to night.

I Will wait upon you there.

Nay thou shall, in faith, in faith thou shall.

This way to please you.

It Is doubtless so, for had his death been certain
The Law by this time had surprised Engine.

The House sets forth no memory of sorrow
As I past by, fear not but he is recovered.

Fie Engine, venture all our hopes thus rashly.

Well Son, we must not flag in the last scene,
When enterprises most need aid and action
What has been further cast by me within,
Aurelia will inform you. Night hastens on,
Away to the prosecution.

I Will to Senio.

Thus our weather-beaten Bark
Arrives at the Haven in the dark,
Hoping there to be redrest
Of the storms which her oppressed,
And now smiles to think upon
Horrors she has undergone,
So we to night expect a happy rest
In deaths cold womb, or in Aurelia's breast.

Cupid defend me, what tempting Ensign's that?

Pox on my Ensign, how does Valerio?

View those exalted hams, Cunicula.

Hell on these Breeches, how does Valerio?

She must be humored. I Will tell the mystery.
My Master to terrefie this his young wife
Commands me still to bear this shield before her.

O wicked provocation! Out upon it!

Now will thou tell us how Valerio does?

Valerio, never better in his life;
'Twas only loss of blood, his wounds were slight;
He sups with me to night, and now sent word
To Pinnario and Procus to be his Guests.

Engine give her one of Philarchus bags.
I may believe thee?

By the reward I hope for.

So, give it her.

But on condition,
To aid and help us with your pretty Servant.

Though we lie by it a fortnight.

My Mistress will instruct you. I Will to the Friar.

My Babilas, no more, for thy fruition
Has brought a Balsom to restore my health.

O my Valerio, were my sister thine
I could with willingness contemn the world
And this Disguize taken off, publish my self
To the rigorous Laws, but when Valerio
Wants Babilas to associate his Designs,
I am not my self, till I have prosecuted
The least of his intents.

Thou art my bosom,
No thought lies there but what thy fancy breeds:
Then prithee advise me if thou can, my friend,
Which way I might wipe off this foul disgrace
This base Groom gave me?

You must not be too rash,
What we resolve must silently be done,
Nor think Valerio to share alone in this.

Not for my Reputation Babilas.
That were unequal odds against one man.

Were his birth equal to us I confess it,
It were a Cowards act, but to a Peasant
What punishment too great can be inflicted?

Thou have cleared my doubts, then let us consult a while.

Pinnario Sir and Procus are without.

Let me withdraw.

By no means Babilas.

Pox on your constancy, and why here to night?
Procus has worn his Boots out to the welts
With seeking you.

And my heels too I think.
Hah, what Switzers beard is that?

Who is it Valerio?

A worthy friend of mine, prithee salute him.

Thy friend and we not know him. Noble Sir,
I shall be proud to be esteemed your servant.

And I to kiss your hands.

You honor me too much, and did my --

Nay, prithee no complements,
'Twill hinder our discourse and spoil our mirth:
Come honest Rogues sit down. Boy, some Tobacco.
And now Pinnario tell me, how do like her?

Like, who?

I must devise some way to know
Where they have been, you think I know nothing.
Why, what staid Engine here but to relate
What you were ventring for. What, to thy friend?
Slight, were I guilty of my fathers death
I would not hide it from my familiar friend.

Why, thou shall know, Valerio is my friend,
It Is but a woman's credit lost at most,
If thou should blab, walk by, I Will tell thee all.

Sir, will you taste of this Tobacco?
Right Spanish I assure you.

I love the weed
For the bold Nations sake, I have heard um say,
You may believe a Spaniard on his word
Before an Englishman on forty oaths.

Amongst my many Travails, 'twas my fortune
To touch upon that preaching Island.

England?

'Twas called so Sir, till another eat it up.

What Country, Sir?

They call it Scotland Sir.

Miraculous. A hungry Country sure.

Troth Sir, good store of stones and long thorn'd bushes.

The people too devoured?

Most on um Sir,
Some few who clapped hands with the Enemy
Are saved, who for a badg of their conformity
Unto the Victors will, sharpened their ears,
And stead of hair, glew'd on their heads the bristles
Of nasty Swine.

Why there is my Logic proved now,
I remember in my last school disputation,
They laughed at me for saying, Homo est asinus rationalis.

Incredible by Engine, he durst not do it.

He dares not cheat as soon, or be a Pander,
But I am glad you escaped so well, if he does so --

Nay come thou must not cherish anger Val,
I dare proclaim (what ever moved him to it)
Him true and faithful.

The event will show it.
What my fat Hostess where have thou been puffing.

Erotia and her Servant.

Pray pardon.
Sir, I have business with you, lend your ear.

Procus a word.

What means this whispering?

A bargain for Cunicula, my life on it.

Excellent Engine.

At the Friars Cell.
And the pretense Octavian's funeral.

The better cloak to hide your Enterprise:
For should you be suspected, pretending that --

Pish, prithee defer this juggling sport a while,
And let us to supper, drink hard, and then
Pox of the world: we are fit for any Exploit.

Sir, supper waits you.

We come Cunicula

Hang me, thou shall profess thy self my foe,
But I will know it.

Prithee I must not tell thee.

I Will tell thee thou art a Coward by this light then,
Forswear thy company -- why, have drank Lethe?
That thou have forgotten what thou have promised me?

Will thou be silent?

As Octavian's murdered Ghost.

Why then thy hand, thou shall along with us.
Aurelia's but for a night, thou art mine for ever.

Nobly resolved.

And so weel prosecute.

Sir, what I utter: grant us but your presence,
I Will pawn my honor shall be manifest.

Shall I believe Philarchus, whose account
Has stretched above the reach of common men,
Whose Character is known about the City,
To be full of faith and awful gravity.
Shall I believe I say, that this this man
Would dim the luster of his dear Repute
By such an act as this 'twere sin to credit it.

Sir, if my zeal to you has raised your temper,
You must not look now for a rough reply
From him whose grief is raised above his anger,
Yet this in the midst of my extrem'st distraction,
Which for Aurelia's sake I intimate.
Be pleased to night to grace Octavian's Hearse
At the Friars Cell, where if I prove not this
Let me be held a Traitor. Think on it. Farewell.

To all this worlds content if this prove true.

Fire, fire, where is it? O that my Gold would turn
To kindled fuel, or my rotten Bonds
Engender flame to burn themselves to ashes,
And thaw my frozen joints. I quake for cold
Horned and sterv'd too, this it is for age to dote

Heaven bless my Master, your Ague still upon you.

O Engine, art thou come, lend me thy hand.
Have I it? tell me, for I have lost my feeling.

Why, you have forgot the Lecture that I read you!
Nay then I see all labors lost on you.
What tremble at a sudden interruption?
Why, who'd have thought your wife had been so near?
'Twas a mere chance, for my pains despair not
That way has failed, but I have now invented
So sure a plot, so certain a soundation --
Why do you start at that should make you glad?
Why, this me thinks should raise and rally up
Your blasted spirits, and like an angry Ram
Make you retreat to run with greater force.

Fa la la, la la fa, la la la, fa la.

Stamped like Bucephalus, again, again Sir.
O lechery in age what Monster art thou?

Come lovely Phillis, since that thy will is --

So does the shadow hurt the tender Grass
Or mornings dew suppress the opening flowers,
As does the nimble feet of young Philarchus
Imprint their weight upon the fruitful earth.

I could now caper ore the Moon me thinks.

Over an earthly Moon, (be ruled by me)
And you shall presently.

How? where? which way?

How he inchants himself within the nooz?
Such is my care and diligence to serve you,
Forgetful of my self and all the world,
So I may purchase your high prized favor.

My favor Engine.

It Is that I only aim at:
And to give fire and level at my ends,
Hear Sir the cunningst plot wit ere found out:
This night, this night, this happy pleasant night
You are to meet at the holy Friars Cell,
The rarest Pidgeon, comfortablest Dove --

But what affairs shall I pretend my Engine?

Why, your wife with Senio your father in law,
Are both invited to Octavian's funeral:
Set out with them, 'twill be a good excuse;
And once being there, by me you shall beled
Where you shall find --

Such pastime, such delight.

Wolf, how the mere conceit makes his Chaps mumble?
Why are you idle Sir? by this they are going.

But for thy reward, nay, in faith thou shall.

I have battered yet the Rock, if I do split.

Yet I think it not unfit since all is prepared,
If you do make a second invitation.

Doubtless he will come.

We must be certain, Rogat.
If Senio fail our enterprise is lost:
A minutes complement and they are ours.

Since you will have it so I am content.

Thus the wounds which bleeding were
Are now stopping by my care.
It Is the glory of the Friar
To be Chorus in this Quire,
Where our sorrows are divorcing,
And no envy reinforcing.
Thus innocence at last shall wear the Crown,
When vice its self with her own hands plucks down.

Can it be possible that you should thus
Oppose my service and delude your self.

What means the fellow?

What does Valerio here?

Why, he comes to tell thee he has forgot thy fault,
Upon condition to be partner with us.
His friend to his honest friend a Travailer,
Alas he will do nothing but keep council, he.

Babilas I must then conclude their stay.
I have it, excellent. How am I bound
And twice rewarded for this favor Sir?
But mediate for me Sir, I Will fit you all.

Valerio a word.

Good Sir be earnest.

By all our friendship, and familiar love,
By valor, honor, faith and loyalty,
Forget, forgive, and here again receive
This trusty fellow.

Sir, upon my knees.

Upon condition I may participate

I have another Sir, on purpose for you.
Equal in all things to Pinnario's.
And see how it happens; two and two.

Good Engine?

Sir, for the cause of my affront, but stay
Till I have praefac'd this small satisfaction
And I will show you --

Hang all Repetitions,
'Twas a mere dream, thou never wrong'st me Engine.

Concupiscence, what Cowards are thy slaves?
Gentlemen follow softly: not a word.
So, here stay you Sir with your noble friend,
But stir not for fear of losing, the Cave is wide
And dark: when you hear this enchanting melody,
Come Cloris hie we to to the Bower --
That Is the word to know your wench by.

Come Cloris hie we --

And then you have her.
Your wench shall find you out, you need not stir.
When you have done I will conduct you forth,
But stir not till then, for Octavian's Hearse lies near,
If you should stumble at it, you are lost.
Mum not a word. Now comes your turn Philarchus.

First Sir, I bid you welcome to my grief
Then to the unfolding of the strangest plot
The wicked ere invented, or Hell produced.

Sir, you amaze me with wonder, and yet still
Draw or't a curtain to interpose the knowledge.

Please you to enter, it soon shall be withdrawn.

Now Engine, now, now are we left alone.

Follow then softly, I Will find you company.

If I do not bore her, then cozen me again.

I will so Sir.

How Engine, Cousin me?

I will go Sir, I said.

I cry thee mercy.
At his mercy now indeed. I hope she brings
Full sparkling ey-balls and a shining brow,
I scarce shall grope her else; so thick's the darkness.
But why may not this Engine here have an Engine
Subtly prepared to wash my appetite
Pish, I am diffident, it cannot be
He means as plainly as I am full of wrinkles.

Miraculous, this cannot be Philarchus.

The end proves that, pray interrupt him not.

Philarchus, Master, Master.

Here, here.

Take here then your Tassel gentle.

Yes faith I Will warrant thee, and make her stoop too.

You may be louder, Sir.

But the old men.

In the Friars Chapel, far enough from you.
Sir, strike on opportunity while she is here;
You may trail many a night for such a scent.
Well, my old Master expects me.

My own own Engine, all the wealth I have:
Come my young Parsley-bed, come prithee kiss me.

Now Sir it works.

The Devil, it is the Devil:
My Daughter's wedded to a ramping Fiend.

You Will justle all aside, peace and attend.

Well said my nimble Do: what thinks my wench?
If to stretch my pleasures to a large extent,
My Nightingale would warble forth a song.

You must humor him, sing, sing any thing.

So, now to the cold Grave to rise again
Eternally inrob'd with peaceful bliss.

Come Cloris, hie we to the Bower.

My sweet Decoy, I come, I come delight.

Mischief upon him, he will interrupt our sport.

Who Is here, Pinnario?

I, pox on it I.
Hinder me just in action, is this fair play?

Rail at the darkness prithee, and not at me.
Who'd think your Queen should learn my Turtles note?
It Is hellish dark, would I could find my place again
Prithee whistle Babilas that I may find thee out.

Hah, Babilas, my son a whore-master!

But patience Sir, all will be known anon.

Aurelia welcome, come weel make no words.

O what an Ague shakes my unsavory tongue?
And against my will makes me confess my self
A Knave, a Rogue, a most incestuous Villain.

Say you so, say you so. Aurelia my wronged child.

Valerio, Pinnario, Babilas.
Here too skulks some body Valerio talked to;
Welcome wives pounces, Engines staff and shield.
So you would thump me from this den of Devils.

That, that's my Cue. In me Octavians Ghost
The Devils do salute thee, and have sent --

Oh oh oh.

The hungry sword that devourd his youthful blood
To entertain thy putrefied intrails.

Hah, Octavians Ghost!

Octavians Ghost!

A Ghost!

Nay, the Devil shall part us ere we let thee go.

How Is this? My Cave the beaten Road of Lust?
Philarchus and his Trull?

O Father, Father.

Pinnario, Procus, Valerio, Babilas?

We Will all confess, good good Father forgive us,
And by your art remove this fearful Ghost.

Say you so too.

All that I ever did
Since my day of birth; O oh my chattering teeth,
My quaking bowels, O.

Then stand apart;
Brother of earth, and shadow of frail flesh,
By my holy Order I command thee speak,
What crimes on earth remit thy pains in Hell?
And gives thee license, like Octavians Ghost
To trace the upper Region of us Mortals?

Let me first suck away this old man's soul,
And I Will obey thee, or with my fiery eyes
Flash him to ashes.

O Father, Friar, Father.

Speak, speak, or I will sink thy troubled Ghost
Unsatisfied into the cold earths womb.

Let him confess then all the injuries,
The wrongs, the miseries, afflictions,
Abuses, terrors, fears, threats, and disgraces,
He ere did think, act, or intend to Aurelia;
Next let the knees of Babilas my foe
Bend at my feet, and there forgiveness ask,
To appease my wrathful spirit.

I do, I do.

Aurelia now in the arms of brave Pinnario,
I do bequeath as his.

Bear witness, Father.

He Will not confess. Let me foam Brimstone on him.

O yes, good Devil, confess, I Will confess all.

My time is short, be brief.

Briefer than words.
Where Is Engine, O that Engine, he has a Paper
Filled with my wrongs committed to Aurelia,
Which have been many, vile, notorious,
To the defiling of her name and bed.

My nimble Ghost has fetched the paper already.
Is all this true? Swear, swear, thou worse than damned.

By my present fears, by the mercy that I hope for

I come you houling Furies, make me way.

And we supply your room, nay you may enter,
The Ghost is vanished.

Shame of Gravity.

Rogat and Senio? Infamy, disgrace:
Sir, make me not a shame to all the world;
I will repair the ruins I have made
With the best satisfaction of my life.
Dear wife (if I may call thee so) on my knees
I do entreat thy mediation.

But I good Son,
Must not forget the appeasing of the Ghost.

What means my Father still to talk of Ghosts?

Yes, and his Ghost, till fair Aurelia
Be made Pinnario's will ever haunt thee.

I do resign and freely give her up.

Marry, and I will keep her. Ah sweet Mistress.
I knew I should arrive at last though long.
But where is this Engine, this dissembling Rogue?

Here Sir, why stare you? you called me, did you not?

Damned lying spirit, Aurelia with Engine?
What Snail hid in her slimy shell have I got?
Cunicula.

Your own Sir, flesh and bone.

Procus, Valerio, my constant friends,
Shall we still flatter and beguile our selves
With this base Varlets sauciness and pride,
So many evidences of our shame
As here are present: if we murder him,
Will say he merited that punishment:
Draw then, and on him.

Rascal we will mark your Carkase.

Why, Gentlemen, this rudeness is below
A Commons mutiny, or Sailers muster.

Dauphine!

Were It thou the Ghost and thing that cheated us?

Thank this white sheet and this disguise, I was;
Nay, tremble not, I am no Ghost, Philarchus,
Give you joy young Sir, and your fat wife Erotia.

Erotia!

Philarchus with a Bawd.

Where shall I look? That I were blind and deaf.

Nay, all appears not yet, for that the world
May testify how much Dauphine preferred
His brothers life before my fair Estate.
By Dauphines help behold Octavian safe.

Octavian!

It is my Son alive, in health and lusty.

By my great Boots as greatly joy to see thee.

So do we all.

To all my humblest thanks.
And Gentlemen I soon will satisfy
Your longing expectation, give me first leave
To acquit my wronged Aurelia of this man.

Now, now, I am slicing for the Devils breakfast.

See here with his own hand registered
All the devices, plots, conspiracies,
To Aurelia offered.

I Will read them presently --

Stay Sir, Aurelia now is mine again,
I must not sow distaste with my springing joys:
Let him but vow to obey this one command,
And thus his faults are torn.

I do protest.

Then I command and charge you to receive
This equal wife into your feeble arms;
Cherish, embrace her, and both live honestly.

Marry a whore.

Then I Will proclaim all.

Hold noble just Octavian, I obey you.

And me to Giblets, I Will chip you into Mommocks else.

So, so, Aurelia's cruelty in her too.

Hark brother, pause a little; I have now
A happy occasion to advance my fortune:
You know I have but a small Annuity,
But all had been mine, had I not saved your life,
By acting Engine for you.

Thou have so nobly freed me from my fears
That I am only poor in thanking thee,
Command what ere thou will.

Hark then. You see Philarchus is so frighted
So ashamed, and fearful of what you may discover,
That he will do any thing so you be secret.
Faith, add one more command, and let it be
To settle on me two hundred pounds a year,
And then thou have nobly recompensed thy brother;
I have a Bond here of twenty thousand pound
Ready ingrost to tie him to his promise.

It Is done, I Will warrant thee. Stay I recant,
Shall I be good to thee, conceal thy faults,
Marry thee to a fit wife, and all this
To thee my Enemy, yet reap no benefit?

What a poor doting fool can give, receive.

Then on my brother Dauphine engage to settle
Two hundred pounds a year, no words, but presently
Seal to perform it, else by my revenge --

No big words, if you have mercy, what shall I do?
Two hundred pound, though dearer than my blood,
Yet cheap enough to save my Reputation.
I do consent, give me the Bond, I Will seal.

Father and Gentlemen your hands to witness.

To what my son?

A trifling thing called two hundred pounds a year
Philarchus here is bound to settle on me.

How Is that? My hand and blessing too.

A lucky Rogue, and yet wears no great Boots.

I deliver you this as my Act and Deed.

Why, so, this is a blessed end of Usury,
To purchase Land to bestow on younger brothers.
May all rich Citizens observe thy charity.

Octavian as I rejoice to see
Thy forgotten dust resume a shape again,
So I lament the deprivation
Of Aurelia from thee and all men else.

How Is this?

Alas, she is married to Philarchus.

Hold Senio, and hear the Friar speak,
And from his words gather the union
Of these so long divorced pair of Lovers.
Walking abroad to taste the morning sweetness
A goary track of blood made me a path
To the unwelcome place, where wounds lay gasping
Of a slain body, ghastly, stiff, disguised
For fear of the Edict then new proclaimed:
I raised his body with my aged arms,
Bore him to be interred within my Cell,
But searching his wounds, and pulling off his Vizard,
(With pale fear daunted) I beheld his face,
Which me thought was colored with some hope of life;
In short such bounty Heaven lent my pains,
That with my Art I soon recalled again.
His shrinking spirits. But he whose only life
Was hid and cherisht in Aurelia's bosom
Bursts out loud cries for his Aurelia,
And that he feared, if's death were but suspected
Her father then would force her to Philarchus:
All comforts I administered were loathsome,
Unless I Would sweeten them with his Aurelia:
I found this grief was desperate, which made me
Send in all haste to Rogat and Aurelia,
And to be certain, and add joy to health,
(And with consent of Rogat and Aurelia,)
By my holy Order made them Man and Wife.

But why so long did you conceal the Marriage?

Hearing Philarchus was the selected man,
And doubting least Octavians wounds might prove
Still mortal, and that Senio would not hazard
(On that account) his daughter to Octavian,
And that Philarchus Gold and solid outside
Should tempt and cozen you, grave Senio,
To give your daughter up to him she hated,
And on a fathers curse wed whom she abhorred.
(Ashamed to see an old man dote in love)
'Twas our invention, Dauphine thus disguised
Should fright and terrefie Philarchus,
Unto a true confession of himself.

Why, then you married Aurelia and Octavian?

I did.

And your pretense of Dauphines hot pursuit
In search of Babilas, was but supposed,
That so he might act Engine unsuspected.

It was indeed.

My blessing, my blessing on you both.

Now may I call thee twice mine bright Aurelia.

Pinnario though young Octavians friend,
You have done ill, and grossly have betrayed
In this poor wench even innocence it self,
It will agree with our conformity,
If you create Cunicula your wife.

Troth now I am up, and for Octavians sake:
Do hear Cunicula, after variety
Of bed-fellows, will one content thee? Ha?

Yes, and my prayers for this conversion.

How is my Cell blessed?

Nay, since all is lost, I Will to my Boots again.

Now to you Babilas, whose fortune 'twas
To glory in my conquest, let me tell thee,
Dauphine has fetched mine honor back again
From thy friends bosom, and if you repine
Again, I dare thee to a second fight.

No more contention unless it be in friendship:
Happy Octavian I beg thy love and pardon.

Thou have um back. Henceforth for ever friends.

Was Babilas the cause then of our quarrel?

He was.

Valerio and Dauphine then agree too.

I Will mediate betwixt um: give me your hands,
Because in my opinion all are quit,
For what Octavian lost by Babilas
In Valerio's blood was recompensed by Dauphine,
What Valerio suffered was before maintained
By the hand of Babilas. By the love and honor
For which you fought for, I command you:
Receive each others friendships to your bosoms.

With my souls best power.

With joy and gladness.

Pinnario and Procus I ask your pardon.
'Twas for my brothers Mistress I used you thus.
When you have a Mistress each of you command,
Both of us how or in what form you please.

And by my great Boots thou will act it rarely.
Well. Since 'twas for a handsome Lass, Dauphine,
And on condition of the like assistance
For me, when I shall need thee. Let Us embrace.

On the same terms then let us all embrace.

For ever real, hearty and true Friends.

To make this union stronger, let me entreat
You all would honor my poor house this night,
And taste a supper seasoned with your welcome.

We all consent.

Take then thy fair one in thy arms,
And Saints protect ye from all harms;
Pinnario with Cuniculu,
Philarchus with Erotia,
Valerio, Babilas, and Procus, they
Shall be the Bridemen of this day;
Dauphine with his new purchase then
The rare alms of a Citizen;
Wise Rogat with grave Senio,
And last my self the Friar too.
All to my Chapel then away
To those delights which show the day.
Thus flourish shall the just, and still increase,
Till death them crown with everlasting peace.

It Is done without Amen, or superstition,
Popes Bull, or the Committees inquisition:
What think ye now of Plays? Abominable:
Or is it 'cause you want wit to unfold a Fable,
Pick out the Allegory, drive the sense
Where the Plot aims it: that your benevolence
Should clap us, and our mouths up. Confess, confess;
You would be something, and against Plays you press,
To be pricked down as Statesmen, not because
You do conceive um hurtful, but will make Laws,
To undo the Gallants pastime of the Land:
Beats down because you cannot understand.
Slow Readers, look upon the Roman State,
Whose high built frame the stars durst emulate,
And look as far as they. Ask Livie there,
How many worthies graced her Theater:
They whose civility has nursed us all;
Thought um most holy, styled um Tragical,
From their Gods Sacrifices. And must we,
Whose pollish'd Scene purged from obscenity
By Poets flaming fancies, whose bright rays
Consume scurrility, and fix the Bays
With us to fan profaness, drive away
Light chaff, that in pure colors, Scenes display.
When plots work high with contradictions filled,
Amazing you, how are they reconciled?
Must we I say be censured? Why it is your nature
To gaze at new things, adore the fashions altar.
No, more resist your own opinions. We
Will dress our Scenes with various novelty,
And teach you wit enough for eighteen pence
Above the reach of the Common Councils sense.
Try and persever, if you find this true,
Silence your errors, and we are quit with you.

