THe Author (as late custom has thought fit)
Makes me the Prologue to his wandering Wit;
The Gate into his Walks, through which you may
Behold a petty prospect of the Play;
A Play of Walks, or you may please to rank it,
With that which Ladies love, A running Banquet:
And, though the Scoene be Islington, we swear,
We will not blow ye up with Bottle Bear;
Cram ye with Cream and Fools, which sweetly please
Ladies of Fortune and young Prentices,
Who (when the Supervisors come to find 'um)
Quake like the Custard which they leave behind 'um.
Yet to exalt your spleen, he has invented,
Persons that you will all know when they are presented;
Nay they shall know themselves, and that is more,
It may be then you ever knew before.
We Will show you things not taken out of Hist'ries,
A loyal Lover, and a grateful Mistress,
A futile Frenchman (acted to the life)
A jealous husband and a jocund wife,
That kisseth, danceth, tipples like a Tench,
A Chamber-Gallant and a Kitchin-wench;
A jovial Cobbler (or a Quibler rather)
A Catchpole that arrested his own father;
A crew of Ranters to the Jail committed,
A dead man raised, a Usurer outwitted,
A Prison-Pimp discovered and detected,
The Compter charactered, the Hole dissected.
Here my Commission ends, lest I betray
The Plot, and show the Clock-work of the I lay:
Your liking will (like to the Suns bright rays)
Lighten the Jail, and plant these Walks with Bays,
Where you will find some Flowers as well as stalks,
Then lend's your hands, we will lead you to the Walks,

BOy Drawer.


Drawer, Sirrah.


By and by, anon, anon Sir.


Why thou Parte-per-villain,
Drawer and Tapster,
Are you so taken up with your Holyday Ghests,
A Gentleman can have no attendance?

Attendance? Yes Sir, What Wine will it please you to drink?


That is, which of three sorts will ye drink, Sack, White, or Claret.


Nay (with your favor Sir) we have more variety then those.


Well then Sir, without farther disputation, bring White Wine, and let it be
right


I shall Sir.


Well Frank, and how does thy little Mistress?


What little Mistress?


Why she that is the rarest, the fairest that ever was Maid, Jack Trimwel the
Chyrurgeons wife


Mum, not a word, our plots are almost discovered, I have kept some villains
company that have betrayed me to the jealous Coxcomb (her husband) she will be
here presently


Who have sent?


My old Mercury, Alexander Pimpwel.


Look, you can no sooner talk of Pimpwel,
But the Drawer comes; sirrah, have you any
Whores in the house?

I cannot tell Sir, I Will ask the Fiddlers.


Hark you sirrah, have you any females in the house?


Yes Sir, there is half a score in several rooms.


Why you rogue, do you doubt whether there be
Any whores in the house then?

Why thou rebel to Chastity, do thou conceive the stock of Females virtue is
so extremely wasted, that in so small a number as they are, the most part must
be vicious


I, I vow if there were but two there, though my Mother were one.


And thy Aunt the other.


I mean so, the other should be one of my Aunts.


Little Betty, your humble servant.


But hark you Frank, what Gentlemen are these?


Friends of mine, most dear and intimate, salute them.


Oh, y' are a pretty Gentleman to send for me into company.


Lady your humble servant.


Turn to me honey, and give me a kiss.


Turn to you Sir, which part? my face is toward you already.


By the Cherry-lip of Venus, you are wondrous witty, Lady.


I am glad Sir you so apprehend it.


It Is not my apprehension can mend it.


Is she not wondrous fair?


I dare not tell you,
For should I grow so passionate in praise
As her worth merits, I might justly fear
Your fondness of her would suspect my friendship;
For in this age Experience makes it common,
He needs must love that does but praise a woman.

You wrong my friendship to suppose I doubt you.
It were an injury to her and you;
The base suspect from neither is exempted,
To think that you should tempt, or she be tempted.

You are full of Noble confidence, I think she
Loves you well.

Or she does well dissemble,
But here is the woe, what bondage is he in,
That lives in love, when all his love is sin?

Gentlemen, does my coming cause this division among you?
Such separation in so few a number has been unusual.

Your coming Lady rather makes an unity,
Frank Rivers I Will begin a round to thy Mistress.

Let it come.


I vow I Will pledg't a brimmer:


Mr. Flylove is your name I pray Sir.


Yes, so they say Sir.


There Is a woman without would speak with you.


Prithee what manner of piece is it?


A good homely creature Sir, some servant I believe,
A Maidservant I dare swear she is not,
For her nose and belly do almost meet.

A strange creature, either she has a very


No Sir, she I come in to you.


Prithee honest Drowzy.


Honest Drowzy I, I was honest Drowzy before I knew you.


Nay but prithee Drowzy that was once honest,
Let me speak with thee in private.

No Sir, you have spoken too much in private with me already, Ecce sign, and
Jle speak to you here Sir; for all your fine Lass there in the silk, I might
have been as fine as she, and yaw had kept your word


How now Stephen, what is the matter?


What Is that to yaw sir,
Pray meddle with your own business.

Prithee be gone Jack, it is an honest Lass comes with an errand to me.


An arrant, what arrant am I, I come to speak to you Sir, and to have
satisfaction for the wrong you have done me, ye shall nere carry it to heaven
nor to hell


What the Devil shall I do, Drawer?
Prithee what have thou brought me here, a mad wench?

What would you have sirrah?


A pox of your greasy fingers,
An you were not with Child --
-- If she be mad, I pray Sir do you tame her.

How now Stephen, what is the business?


What care yaw sir, you may go to yawr Gentlewoman in the long locks again.


What is the woman mad?


Mad! no she is as well in her wits as you are, though she is not so fine
forsooth


Mrs. Trimwell, as I live your Husband's here.


Marry Heaven defend.


He Is coming up stayrs.


What will become on's.


There Is but one way, and that's this, here is a door goes down another pair of
stayrs, whilst he comes up, do you run down, you may easily escape unseen by
the backside of Islington. Let me alone here


I, I, come let us go, I think the devil haunts us to day.


Pray whither go yaw sir,
I have more to say to you then so.

Prithee honest Pimpwel keep this mad wench from me, and do you pay the
reckning, you know our old rendezvous


Well, well, let me alone.


Keep me back! sirrah I Will set all my fingers in your eyes, if you keep me back,
though your name be Pimpw. you shall not keep the door at this time


How now what is the matter? vanished, ha all vanished, only one rogue and a
dirty whore, what are you, what are you, pray turn about


Dirty whore, you lie like a base rogue, I am as honest a woman as thy wife,
what come you for


As honest as my wife, I, I, it may be so good Porpus, I speak not to you, pray
Sir where is all your company gone, where is my wife


Your wife Sir.


My wife Sir, I my wife Sir.


Do thou call me Porpus, you may be ashamed to liken a woman to a beast, I am
as like a Christian as thou art, or any of thy kin, my father was as honest a
man as any in Warwickshire, and his daughter shall not be made a fool yet as


Where Is my wife? what secret holes have you?


What do you ask me for your wife Sir, I know her not, nor you?


Anon, anon Sir, by and by, did you call? how now what is become of the company
was here, who pays the Reckoning


Hey day, what have they left their Reckoning to pay, they were in mighty have
it seems


Was the woman in the black Guown yawr woife Sir?


Yes, which way went they?


Marry 3. Gentlemen carried her down them stayrs,
You were best make haste after 'um, or they will
Make you a Coock old before you come, and then
You Will lose the sport.

He follow presently, I guess where to find them.
If I cannot overtake them.

By the mass I Will follow too, for my Gentleman
Is amongst them; I Will teach him to turn
Up wenches bellies, and give them no sartifaction.

Well you have your reckoning Drawer.


To a farthing Sir, if you will stay Sir, I Will give
You one pint, because you shall remember the
Sarazens head in Islington.

I cannot stay now, I faith sirrah, but next time
I come this way.

Well Sir, you are welcome, by and by, I come, I come.


So, so, a bad shift's better then none; oh the rage his head is filld with for
his wife, and the belly full of vexation she has to find Mr. Flylove. Pox of
all fools, I wonder what mad folly possessed him to lie with this dirty, greasy
kichen-wench, was his appetite so sharp set, that he must needs be lapping in
the Dripping-pan? well, I Will follow them; I know their old haunt (the King's Head
at Hogsdown) Jealousy has many eyes, I must prevent the searcher: If all my
plots hit right, I Will make the Cuckolds horns hang in his light


My fair Splendora, though my fortunes are,
Humble as he that ownes them; yet I can
Love thee with holy ardencie; devoutly
As zealous men in prayer do their Saints,
Or Votaries their Goddess.

I know you want not wit to coin a passion,
And pray (with all Mercurio) conceive,
I know how many symtoms of true love,
A Parasite (in service to his Mrs.)
Can use to gain his end; it is not a sigh,
Dissembled sorrow in a far straind tear,
The folded Arms; Encomiums composed,
With many interjections, nor the trick,
Of praising what she is pleased with, can move me
To the least faith, he whose slow tongue speaks least,
In Love or sorrow oftentimes means best.

I am sorry you should think I doubt your knowledge
I know you have a soul as full of Rays,
As Delphean Phoebus in oraculous glory;
You have divinity enough to see,
The purest love from nicest flattery,
Or I should never affect you, it is my thought,
That she whom flattery can purchase to me,
By one more subtle may be flattered fro me.

You give a large account of your pure thoughts,
And I believe thee with such confidence,
As to not do it, were heresy; There
Resign thee all the intrest I hold dear,
In this weak frame.

That shall contain us both,
Our hearts shall be one individual essence,
To which we will frame like passions, like affections,
By this divinest Metomorphosis,
The Gods (well pleased) shall terminate our lives,
Both at one Expiration in good age,
Seasoned and fit for glory, more Divine,
Where in one or be our unity shall shine.

Who Is here (undone) Mercurio and my daughter
Embracing? Changes Kisses? I shall part you.

My Father.


Splendora, your Mother calls you.


I am sorry Sir I have such faulty ears, as not
To hear till your love please to tell me,
I attend her.

Sir it is to you that I direct my speech.


I shall attend Sir what your speech directs.


To this intent I frame it, what is the cause
You make it all the business of your time
In visits to my house? though uninvited,
I do not say you are an unwelcome guest,
But till I know the motive of your coming,
I shall be cautious in your entertainment.

Your words do bear a strange suspect in them,
And this to me, the Son of him that was
Once your best friend; whose love has made you rich,
The manner's somewhat strange.

I shall be plainer,
I disaffect your neerness with my daughter,
I have beheld loose kisses fond embraces,
Her sighs to echo yours, such wantonness
As may not fit a pair of single creatures,
Much less you two, considering the distance.
Sir to be brief, I do suspect you love her.

Oh nere suspect so Sir, you may be sure on it.


Why this is honest truth, fine right down dealing.


And she loves you.


I hope she will in time Sir.


It Is well Sir, lend me your ear.


Your pleasure.


I fear this whispering portends no good,
Here Is pen and paper, I Will appoint our meeting,
Though we shall miss that ceremonious way,
Of lovely parting we were wont to have,
I Will find occasion to deliver this.

Nay which is more, you are a riotous man.


My dear Mercurio.


And let me tell you Sir, my Child and wealth,
Shall not be both exposed to your profuseness
Therefore (by my admonishment) pray leave her.

Meet me to morrow.


Sir did you ever love?


Yes.


But did you e're affect a Virgin truly?


As man can do.


When.


To morrow in the afternoon.


When time and love had made me capable
Of woman and her virtues.

In the green long walk by Newington.


Was not her presence all your heaven on earth,
And then her absence brought such sickly thoughts,
No novelty could mitigate.

Very true.


With that affection I esteem your daughter.
Just such a heaven her blessed society,
And such a hell her absence, had we not
By some diviner inspiration,
A little prospect to eternity,
I should believe all joys of soul were her:
The most indulgent Mothers never loved,
Their fair ligitimate Babes with such a fondness,
As I do your Splendora.

You are very bountiful in your expression.


Too niggardly, her goodness merits more
Then I have worth to know, or tongue to utter;
I think her virtues all are infinite,
And not to be examined, I have searched,
With most ingenious and industrious boldness,
To take the height of her perfection,
But forced with admiration to retire,
For still as I drew near her soul flew higher.

Your constant heart Splendora.


You have expressed her merit and your love,
And had you an estate equal to either,
With worldly providence and care to use it,
I should esteem your motion, as you are;
Your polyte phrases cannot work on me,
Nor shall they on my daughter, whose obedience
Must be conformable to my dispose.

Did you call Sir.


No,
But since your diligence has got such wings,
Stay and take leave of your kind visitant,
And be not tedious.

Well Sir.


I have some business may concern your good,
Which you cannot conceive.

I do believe you.
You see my dear Mercurio, how adverse
My Father is, time's short, read that, farewell,
We Will meet again.

This parting is my hell.


Sir the French Knight is come,


Wait on him in.


I shall Sir.


Oh, my torment!


Noble Sir Reverence, your humble servant.


Tres humble Serviture Monsieur.
A vostre Serviture Madam.

Sir you too seldom grace us with your visits,
Although our country custom cannot yield,
That fair and ceremonious entertainment
You French men use; believe me you are welcome.

Gramercie Monsieur de mon ceuir,
Vat you name de Madam your dater a.

We call her Sir Splendora.


Spent whora?


Splen do ra.


Split whore a.


The name is some what hard Sir.


Begar so it is, Split, Split, Split whore a.


Splen.


Splen.


Do.


Do.


ra.


ra.


Splen do ra.


Splen do ra.


Right Sir.


Madam Splen do ra, will you give Sir Reverence, Leave to kiss beshide your
sheeke


Let it be but of one side I beseech you Sir, I have lately been troubled with
the Tooth-ake


I Will leave you sir to opportunity.


Gramercie Monseir, vostre serviteur.


At your back Monseir.


Allo allo.


I am gone Sir.


Madam your fadra say to me he would have me take you for my wife, my Lady, my
Madam, my Madam Lamard


Did my father bid you put me in hope of these phantasticke titles?


Fantasy, begar be brave title to be wife to Sir Reverence Lamard.


To be your wife Sir Reverence?


Awee, and Sir Reverence to be your husband.


I thank you Sir.
I hope that uinon will happy prove;
Where Sir Reverence is the beginning of love,

Begar dat was right, me love you out of all cry, You shall be a Lady, when we
have marry, we will go to Parry, begar was de brave City of the World, me will
have you dress like de Frensh Madam, and ride in your Carrosh, begar dis
English Dress is noting; it is not a le mode France, den me vill show you de
brave Palace of de King, you never see such state in your life, Oh brava,
brava; and den


Pray stay there Sir.
I wonder that a Knight of your vast wealth,
In your own Country could not find a fair one,
Worthy to meet your merit; I may doubt
You are not what you would have me conceive,
Or my too credulous father is informed,
And did your judgment, sympathize with mine,
I would not wish you to adventure marriage,
With any Lady of another Nation,
There is a fitness to be found in love,
Which very far transcends wealth wit or beauty,
By him that keeps me for a better end,
I would not be your Mistress, could you give,
All Paris, for Jointure; The truth is I am engaged.

Begar den you shall be no Lady.


I shall be contented with my fortune.


How is it Sir Reverence, what is my daughter plyant,


Begar your dauter say she will no have me, if I Shall give all Pary for a
zhoynture


You must give Virgins license to be Nice,
Things easily purchased are not valuable,
Is it their own worth or their scarcity,
That sets so high a price on Jewels think you.

Begar your dauter be foolish to slight me, She bid me love de frensh Lady,
begar so me can


I hope she has not angerd you Sir Reverence.


Begar is vill know me can have de brave Lady in France.


I do not question't Sir, she is too peevish.


Begar me have scorn a Countess in France, and
Have had two three love letter from a Doushesse,
Since I came to Englant, your dauter no know
Vat J am, she be fool beggar -- Vildfire.

Monsieur.


Done moy me manteau.


Awy Monsieur vostre service.


I hope you will not leave us so Sir.


Begar me vill stay no longer your dauter a scorn my love.


Be not so discontented good Sir Rev. all shall be to your wish, I have
prepared a course banquet for you Sir Rev


She scorn a my love.


This fool it seems is noted to be rich,
What Is that to me? In dignity a Knight,
A Knight Sir Reverence, then he is of France,
The only man of fashion (from whose Country
All things are acceptable, no disease excepted)
Let him go seek a choice in his own Nation,
French feats grow stale, I Will have some newer fashion;
I Will learn to love for worth, not one whose flashes
Blaze much, and are at one time flame and ashes,
Give me a man whose love is built upon
Eternal virtue and perfection,
Who loves for mental worth, not outward show,
And such a one is my Mercurio.

Art sure thou sawst them go this way?


Sure, yes sure enough, I Am sure they crossed this field, went over that style,
and I am much deceived if I did not see Pimpwel peep out of yonder Tavern
window


That Is the King's Head I know it,
Oh for some queint disguise,
My jealousy has yet no occular proof,
These two years have I wandered in this maze,
And still been blinded by her sublil sleights?
That Rivers is the man I most suspect,
And yet I dare not think he wrongs my bed,
The very thought bred in a jealous breast,
Is proof enough, and then were he defenc'd
With Devils I would end him;
Oh! we vain men covet most to see
What we would not, my eyes can take no rest;
How many Moonshine nights and Summer evenings,
In various shapes have I walked out to find her,
But never could?

Would I had never seen the face of Mr. Flylove.


Thou have even got, thy belly full of mischief too,
But prithee do not cry out in the fields, though I Am
A Surgeon, I shall make but a mad midwife,
Thou had better repare to the City, and quietly,
For a month hire the next Cage is to be let, you
May buy a bed in Smith-feild, they come to Town,
In Cart-loads.

No Sir, I know you will lend me a room for one month,
I Will enquier for your house when I come to London,
How far do you live from Cuckolds haven.

A pox on you for a whore, you have wit enough to jeer though you had not to
keep your Maidenhead


I pray Sir, is it not your black bird that sings,
J cannot keep my wife at home, my wife at home.

Out you greazy kitchen whore.


Why thou fool, is not better to have such a Greazy piece as I am, then to
have a curious fine wife, and cannot come near her


The whore says true, how now who comes here,
Musicians very good, I have a plot,
Come into my head, which by these fiddlers,
Means I Will put in practice, hark you,
Honest Fiddlers (Musicians I should call you)
I am a little Musical my self, Gentlemen
Whither Crowd you so fast.

Sir we are sent for to play to Mr. Rivers at the King's Head.


Frank Rivers.


The same Sir.


Who plays the Citterne.


That do I Sir.


Very good, I have a plot that shall get you double the money you expect.


How is that I pray Sir.


Why look, Frank Rivers is my only Companion, I would now steal upon him in
the middle of's mirth disguised like one of you, I have a false beard in my
pocket, I Will carry the Base, counterfeit to be blind, and that boy shall lead
me, and in the conclusion he shall pay you for the jest


With all our hearts Sir.


Drowzy what will you do?


I Will even home to London, but if you see Mr. Flyloeve tell him I Will serve him
such a trick as he saw in's life time, I Will warrant him


Farewell good Drowzy. Come Gentlemen let us about this business; Aha wife,
in faith I shall overreach you now


I have been a Fiddler these fifteen year,
And never was put in the Stocks before,
If an good fellow will give me some Beer,
I Will Fiddle and fuddle, and never give over.

Fair Lady you are welcome, I shoul salute you by your name if I knew it.


My name is Mary Fair-chaste.


Fair and chaste too, impossible; it is a Paradox to me.


Is it such wonder to be fair and chaste Sir?


No, no, it is no such wonder, A fair Cabinet should contain a fair Jewel; but
since we have had poison in guilt bowls, killing Perfumes in rich Gloves,
Heresy in religious exact habit, and Treason in the well-seeming gravity of
State, we put small trust in form; but what do I trouble you with these things,
let us drink, sing, dance, and be merry boys

We come to be merry, etc.

Gentlemen, what shall we do for anoyse of Vagrants, I have a dancing desire to
exercise my heels

I have sent for Music, but we want a woman.


Its impossible; Drawer.


Did you call Sir?


Entreat your Mistress hither.


I shall Sir, she prevents my service, she is here already.


How does my Madona? my Belladossa? my Ent. Mrs. Summer sinner, the Conntesse
of Hogsdowne


You give me many styles Mr. Flylove.


I have come over as many more styles to behold thee my Queen of the
King's Head. Hark you; what rate holds women's flesh? in brief have thou ever a
piece of Impenitence, that will be sociable, and will desire, only her pleasure
for her pains, if she can dance well, we will bear with any imperfection else;
thou shall not lose all; we will seem to want the knowledge of thy over-reckoning,
and pay thee. You know we are noe Citizens, that (to ease our bodies and
preserve our pockets) keep a due Account of every quart and paper, by
unbuttoning our doublets; or doubt our own memories by calling many reckonings
at one sitting


You are very merry Mr. Flylove, but as I am a virtuous sinner, you could never
have chose a time to have found me so unprovided in a whole summer, there is
but one woman in the house, and she is with a French man, yet I believe his
greatest business is over, if you will allow of his company you may have hers,
nor will he be any interruption to you, for call what you will he will pay freely,
and be as merry as you will give him leave


Have they paid all?


They are now calling.


Prithee entice them in.


No twill become you better, he may conceive I have some end of mine own in it;
your way of invitation will entice him, the society of an English Gentleman, is
his only ambition


Very well; I Will invite him.


Whither go you Stephen?


Sir I Will take my leave of you.


By no means Lady, I Will return presently, aside. Jack Wildblood prithee
entertain this Lady in my absence, she is modest, and thou art civil; but if you
make your seeming civility a bawd to abuse me, look to your self


Well, well, pray follow your humor; Lady you are not merry.


Is the Gentleman your friend gone?


Some private occasion, he will be here suddenly.


I cannot stay Sir.


Mr. Rivers; what is Mr. Flylove gone?


where is the Music?


I have been as far as Redcrosse-street for them, they were playing to a
company of Citizens at the Queens-head, but they told me they would make all
the necessary expedition they could possible, and attend you in Hogsdon here at
the King's Head


Nay, I Will say that for thee, thou art the happiest Purveyor for Wine, Wenches
and Music, that ever was assistant to the increase of sinners


Who should I meet withal coming from thence, through the Fortune-Playhouse
yard, but old Jones the Cobl


Thou should have brought him hither.


I thought you would have Wished so, and I have brought him.


A Cobbler; what is he?


What is he? why the rarest humorist of a Cobbler, that ever was translated into
merry company, his wit is jeering, tart in all such jeasts, nor will he spare
the proudest he in plush. And speaking in a most composed strain, with
countnance grave, no man can take exceptions, but may suppose it ignorance, not
wit; You cannot choose but know him, that is he that owed forty shillings to an
Allderman, to pay 12. pence by the week, when he did exact Cobblers law, and
made his worshipful creditor give him two pots at every payment


Yes, yes, I have heard of him.


Then now you shall see him, here comes the man in Person; welcome Mr. Jones.


Thank you good Mr. Allexander, I Will make bold to salute these worthy
Gentlemen, noble Mr. Wildblood, I take it


The very same Mr. Jones, and how did Mr. Alexander, and you meet.


Honest Mr. Pimpwell (here) was walking I believe about his accasions, I saw 2.
or 3. Gentlemen with him, and in troth because I was in my workydaie Clothes, I
was ashamed to speak with him, but I thank him good Gentleman, he called me to
him, and told me I should see some worthy Gentlemen of my acquaintance


Here Mr. Jones, I Will drink to you and to your wife, do you remember since you
put her in the cage


I pray Sir how long is it since we ^ere merry at the Sargeons head in
Islington, where we drank Sack so long till all our money was gone, but in troth
I think I brought but a groat with me; we came off from the reckoning though
pretty handsomely, but good Gentleman you were forced to leave your silver Seal
behind, but I think you redeemed it again in a little while


Ha, ha, ha, there he has met you Jack.


Gentlemen I presume to invite this worthy Gentleman and his Lady, I pray be
courteous to them


Noble Sir, a friend of yours can never come unwelcome where we are; my service
Sir attends you


Monsieur your tres nmble umble vassale.


Sir according to our downright English Complement you are welcome.


Awee Monsieur, begar me tanke you heartely dear be English Complement for you
again, vat velow's dat


A very honest man Sir, and Beadle of the parish.


A beadle, begar he be no forboon company, my Madam can no endure a beadle.


Alack good Gentlewoman; no Sir, I am no beadle I can assure you, though the
Gentleman pleases to jest


Begar you look as like a rogua as a beadle.


Alack, I believe Monsieur you have heard the ill news lately come forth you
are so angry of the sudden


Begar me have hear no ill news.


then I Will tell you Sir, the sad report goes that most of the English Gentlemen
in France must return to England again, I am sorry for it


Begar vas nothing but lies; how how vat is here, Fiddles? Madam sall we dance?


Well done, you are honest Rascals, every man take his stool, strike up
courageously, and be sure have a special care he that plays oth' base Violin
sleep not, we are no colls you know, you must not flam us


Come Gentlemen shall we try our footing, here am I.


And here am I.


And if this Gentleman please, here I Will be.


Vould all mine heart Monsieur.


I cannot dance believe me Sir.


Nor I, we will only practice.


Excuse me Sir, indeed I cannot dance.


Excuse me Sir, indeed I cannot dance? You shall not dance excuse me then, that
Country trip is old, we will have some novelty


Are you perfect in the tune I gave you last to practice.


Very perfect Sir.


Let me hear it.


Mrs. Trimwel do you observe that old fellow that plays oth' Base.


Well, what of that?


By my life it is your Husband.


My Husband?


Take no notice.


Come the other Change.


Lady my service to you.


Pray let it be your love Sir, Twill make the Health much sweeter.


Thou make me wonder.


As I live it is true.


What? he that plays the Base?


Come to the next.


Here is strange humors in this


Oh your Bulls-head, we will take a course to order you, you blind puppy, because
you wink you think no body can see you; Come the the other Change, and conclude


Begar vas mose brave, my


In Troth Mr. Flylove you dance very well, but that you straddle so much, but if
you take it in time that may be altered; Oh Mr. Flylove you have a little gone
awry, but mum for that


Well said Mr. Jones, do you remember one night when you cast Anchor in the
kennel, and called to the Goldfinder for a Coach, who mounted you in his
Chariot, and drew you to the River Acharon at the backside of Islington


Oh! Mr. Flylove you are an ingenious Gentleman, I have heard high
commendations of you by a Neighbors daughter a friend of mine


Prithee who is that?


It Is a very good natured Lass, if she knew you were here, she would have a
quart of Wine at your service


Do I know her?


Do you know her? Do I know Jone my wife? Do not you know Alice Drowzy?


Pox on you hold your tongue, this dirty whore hants me in a thousand shapes, I
must throw her out of my memory. Come Gentlemen shall we have another Dance


Come Gentlemen the other Dance.


I come, me like de Dance better den Song.


Hold, hold good Monsieur Minikin, for begar dey have dance avay wid my Ladce;
Rogue, Drawer. Ent. Draw


Anon, anon Sir.


Fere be de Zhentlemen and de Ladce.


They have taken Coach Sir, and are at London by this time.


How? how?


Begar me never saw sush a frisk in my life; Vas dis de skip de Angleteire?


I was bid to deliver this Note to him that plays on the Base?


To me? give me't.


Yes, they say your ill fidling made them all dance quite away, they would have
staid longer else


The Devils have unridled me; what is here?

The Woodcock when his head is hid,
Thinks his body is unspid;
Fool when thou come next to find us,
Bring some better trick to blind us;
Pay the reckning, or you will find,
There Is a worser plot behind.

What have you there Sir, a Bill of Exchange?


Pox on your Cobling jeasts,


Begar de Fiddler be mad, he tear his hair off.


Who Is this? My old acquaintance Mr. Trimwel.


Hang up your old acquaintance, do not trouble me, who would have thought that
through this disguise their careless eyes should thus discover me, but I Will
follow them as close as Death does sin


Sir you must pay the Reckoning first.


Shall I.


Before you part, it is your device has made us lose the best Guests that come
to our house


How much is it?


One pound thirteen and nine pence.


Here Is the French Knight, one of their company that called it in, let him
discharge it


Disharge it, begar my Lady


Gentlemen, I Will go pay my part at the bar.


Your part, what is that?


A threepence, a good threepence, a Spanish 3. d. and so farewell to you both
good Gent


Well, there is your money Drawer, I must confess I drank for it.


Who shall pay us Sir?


The Devil pay't, shall I be made a But for every knave to shoot at.


Sir, you are the cause that we have not only lost this money, but our credit
with the Gentlemen, if we had known you had been a Trapan, you should never have
been admitted into our company; you had other pretenses


Well, since 'twas my plot, I am like to pay for it, there is a French crown
among you, pray get you from me. Sir, you are a stranger, and therefore I


Me be glad me come off so, farewell Monsieur Bo-peep.


The just cause of my fears I now perceive,
As evident as daylight; in this Dance
There is composed all that her wanton heart
Can give, or he can covet, I must now
Turn all my love to loathing; Sweet Revenge
I am thy faithful Votary, I will still
Pursue their footsteps, and with wary eyes,
Watch their Adulterous Conspiracies:
Now I have thought upon it, if they defend
Their persons from this plot I now intend,
I will disband my reason, and resign
My Intellectuals, or what else is mine:
Look to it Gallants, the next time you view me,
I Will make you curse the time that e're you knew me.

Time and our fitter opportunity,
The pleasant entertainment of our love
Has almost wasted; it is an hour near night,
And we can tread no farther then to the place
Thy Father has expelled me, we must part,
But urged to it with much more unwillingness,
Then heat from life, when souls and bodies separate.

Thou shall not leave me yet, I Will plant my love
Above my fear, it is a nobler passion,
Nor shall my fathers frown have more command
On my affection, then thy brow, made smooth
By thy own love, credit me gentle youth,
Thou have next rule in this weak mansion
To him that built it.

That Is he.


We know him Sir.


Perform your task then.


I Will warrant you.


Begar me have wash him hither, now me sall be revenge.


Stay not for bayl, I Will double your reward.


You are a kind Gentleman: Sir we arrest you by the name of Mercurio.


Arrest me Sir, who has employed you for this Action? At whose suit is it?


At the Suit of Mr. Nice, a very honest Gentleman I can assure you.


You guess that by his bounty for your baseness: What is the sum?


Twenty pounds upon bond, if you have special Bayl, produce it presently, we
cannot stay


Why is your time so precious that is spent to ruin mankind, be not pray so
hasty, where is the Gentleman


He is not far Sir.


What is your will with me.


Longer time for payment of your debt.


I may forbear no longer, Sir you know the money has been due these 14. weeks,
it is in vain to think you can urge me to an agreement, but my present sum


But not, I entreat that mercy Sir.


Fond Girl ask mercy for your disodedience, I have appeared too temperate with
you, and shown too much indulgence; it is your cause that makes him suffer


And it is his abuse
Will make me perish; Oh remember Sir
You had a wife, my Mother, whose dear dust
With low and humble reverence I kiss:
Had you been seized between two Tigers thus,
Would't not have moved her, made her plyant knees
Grow toth' dull earth, till the deaf Creditor,
(By importunacy more then compunction)
Had sealed a truce 'twixt him and's undone Debtor.

Your superstitious knees in vain are bent
For this bad cause, Laws Moral and Divine,
Have still provided that each man shall claim
What is his right, I but exact mine own.

What can you call your own, that you may spare,
Whilst still the cries of widows, injured Orphans
Beat at the ears of pity; had this man
(Trapt in the snares of Canibals) his own
The fair inheritance his birthright claims,
(Heaven pardon them that have it) I believe
You need not rack his body for your own.

Your zeal makes you forget your self.


My sorrow is too bold indeed, to see
Such pregnant hopes thus blasted in the bloom
Of teeming growth, nipt in the springing bud
Of spreading youth; to see man's span contracted,
Sent to the grave e're yet he can conceive
The end of his Creation, 'cause his Chests
Want coin, not to supply, but cram another:
Joves great impression suffers this decay,
For want of Caesar^ Image stamped in Clay.

I Will hear no more.


A little pray Sir,
He that is so indigent to want the means
Of rendering your right, whilst he enjoys
His fair and open freedom; Can you believe,
That being close pent up with Iron bars,
Stone walls and Jaylors hearts,
Where every cowardly Creditor treads down,
The overthrown Debtor with a doubled sum,
That stands bayl-proof; is that a time to satisfy,
Unless he had the Elixor to convert
The Iron grates to Gold, or (which is best)
To nothing.

Officers what stay you for?


Come will you go Sir.


How diligent in cruelty you are:
Have you the heart to think this good old man
(That knows the scales unto Eternity
Are pity, mercy, love (the best Religion)
Fear of oppression) will commit his youth
To your ungentle usage?

Pray be not moved with us, your father may release him.


Look Sir, the Officers grow merciful,
And seem to bear no part in his undoing;
Shall men that study naught but cruelty,
Out-doe you in an act of gentleness?

Officers, I Will leave him to your charge, take Bail at your peril.


Sir Reverence, will you be bayl for him, you are good for nothing else.


Begar me be no bayl.


There Is a day for thee when no bayl shall be taken; Shall I speak one word with
your Prisoner


Two if you please.


Hark you Mr. Tripes, I shall find you at the Compter gate.


Without fail.


I have another mischievous employment for you.


We shall endeavor to perform it Sir.


Oh Sir, I know you to be deserving men; there is money, enter an Action against
Stephen Flylove at the suit of Alice Drowzy in an Action of assault and battery
committed upon the belly of the said Alice last May, the Planets being Venus
and Mars Rampant, and the Sign Virgo


I apprehend you Sir.


Apprehend me Sir, for what? you are deceived, you must apprehend Mr. Flylove.


I understand you Sir.


Farewell my understanding Sergeant,


Come we must part.


I Will come and visit thee.


Thy sight in prison is my liberty.


Can you conceit why I have singled you thus from the company.


No, pray instruct me Sir.


The instructions are too easy to be good, since you appear so innocently
modest; I Will be your amorous Schoolmaster for once


You Will teach me no ill Doctrine.


No, no, prithee observe me, be but capable, and I Will warrant thee an apt
Scholar


Well-Sir, so far as I perceive it is good, I Will learn.


I Will show you the Lovers Alphabet, be observant then, and be not squeamish,
but do as I direct you; When a Gentleman and's Lady do meet, A. the first
letter is A salutation


The word begins with S.


No matter for the word, give me the sense, B. the next letter, lend me your
fair hand


Very good Sir.


It Is in a very good hand indeed; nay I Will show you more tricks by and by, it
is so very fair that I must kiss it, there is a letter gone that stands for C.I
confess C. may stand for another business, and sitter for the letter, but a
kiss shall serve at this time


On I pray Sir.


Nay, I shall come on fast enough, I warrant you. D. shall join both our hands,
now do we look as if we were wrestling, which of us both should give the first
kiss


You make your own construction Sir.


I, I, no matter, it is nere the worse for that.


Proceed Sir.


Stay, stay, let us pause a little, you will forget it again else, E. is embrace me,
there I have hit you to a letter


You come near me now Sir.


I shall come nearer yet, for F. I Will stroke your cheek.


F. stands for flattery.


Not at this time fair one, if you will tie me punctually to a better F. stands
for Faith or Friendship


That is the truest use on it.


Well, it shall go so then. G. is a Gift.


I Will wear it.


Let me see you.


First make an end.


H. stands for Hug me to you.


I have heard of a Wine called by that name Sir.


Were it Nectar it could not be sweeter then this.


It seems your favor and my embrace do want no acceptance.


I. stands for you, and K. standing for kiss, is I kiss you. By the breath of
Venus you have a pleasant lip


I Am glad it pleases you; to the next letter.


L. is another kiss, it stands for Love.


L. may be lust, but it should be Love.


I, I, it may stand for both by fits. M. stands for Mary.


So it may for Marry.


Remember R. stands for repent, but I am far enough off from that. N, is the
next letter, N. stands for never be good, you shall learn O. Q. P. V. in
private, that is the full prick or conclusion of the Lovers Alphabet


Take heed, be not too hasty.
Some that would seem more nice then virtuous.
Who use a blush, or modest bashfulness,
To vail their knowledge of ill propositions,
(Such as I Am sure pou make, though you have a trick
To smooth it over with your methodick wantonness)
Would be ashamed to tell you your ill meaning,
But I will not.
L. in your Alphabet does stand for lust,
And be not fooled with such a vanity,
To think because you are a handsome man,
Or I so easy won to your society,
That I will do an act may hold proportion
With any baseness; if you can love truly,
Without a glance to any vild respect,
Reveal it, I was never so ill bred
To give discourteous answers.

Love, and love truly, are not you married?

I am not now Sir.

A widow and so cautious, I Will try another ways;
Have I taken up an Angle instead of a Bona Roba?
Yes I can love thee, and can love thee truly, and heartily,
He swear so if thou wilt have me.

Let me but hear you Sir, I Will swear as much.


Will thou, faith stay a little.


What do you pause on it Sir?


No, no, I Am ready enough to swear, I am loath to cast away too big an oath,
and I Am afraid a small one will not suffice her


Come I Will propose the Oath.


With all my heart.


By those diviner powers that govern Contracts, Swear to be true to me.


By all those sacred powers I kiss the book, and ever will observe it, come shall
we walk a side now: Kisses her. Whose here


I am glad you are prevented; How vainly men in their rash heat will swear to
what they never intend


How now Stephen, what do you fly from your Colors?


No Sir, I fly to my Colors, red and white, I Am a right Englishman*


Where Is Pimpwel gone?


I sent him for more Money.


But that Heaven ordained al things for a good end, a man might swear that
Pimpwel was created for a Pimp: how cunningly he found her husband out, and how
suddenly the rogue contrived that quick escape; I will have him put in the
Almanac next to the Gunpowder-Treason


Or Gowries Conspiracy; In what a stammering case now is my Frenchman; and now
I think upon him, I have seen a face as right like that in Parris


Faith so have I.


Were you ever in France Mr. Rivers?


Yes Sweetheart.


I have had a brother there these 14. years, and have not heard-from him.


What part of France?


Paris.


What was his name?


Brooks.


I never heard of him.


Have thou brought the money.


There Is. 5. l.


Go and bespeak supper at the John of Jerusalem.


I fear it is too late.


What Is a clock?


Past 9.


No matter; Lady you shall not leave me.


Indeed I cannot stay, to morrow where you please I Will keep an hour with you.


we will drink a pint and talk on it


I Will tell you news, The French Knight's arrested at the suit of Mr.
Bonaventure an English Merchant for 6000. pound, is gone to prison, no bayl
will be taken


I Am sorry for it; go, prithee make haste.


I am gone.


Gentlemen, my business is to one Mr. Elylove, Can you direct me to him?


What is your business Porter?


I pray read that Letter Sir, I received it from a young Gentleman.


Gentleman! I hope it is no news from Drowzy. To my friend Stephen Flylove;
I Will try what your inside says; Ha, come with all speed, Gentlemen I have sad
news for you, Mercurio is arrested


Arrested!


What devil did the deed?


Nice the rich Merchant, it is but 20. l.


But 20. l. alas poor Gentleman, he can as well discharge 1000.


He has writ to speak with me, he is not yet in prison.


Where is he?


At the Harrow-Tavern in Little Woodstreet.


Come we will all go, perhaps they will take our Bayl.


No hang them, these Citizens will take none but Free men; We Will make a trial
though


I would Pimywel were here again, I am sorry you appointed a Supper.


No matter, we shall know some end on it suddenly.


Let us defer no time, at the Harrow-Tavern say you.


Sir I must take my leave of you at next turning.


Well, meet me at the Jerusalem-Tavern, but be sure you fail not.


Your injunction shall be observed?


I Will leave a Glove at bar.


Mrs. Hemlock if you and your husband do not assist me in this plot of
dexterious mischief (sinister I should call it) I shall be disgraced beyond
remedy; I have now met with an opportunity so pleasing, so fit, so apt to
entertain my purpose, an hour where only Saturn is predominant, shall so jerk
my light-heel'd Gallants, and the politic little Gypsy my wife, Flylove is
the pin that must set all the other wheels a going, which pin this honest blade
my old acquaintance Tripes shall turn, Mr. Mace I know your part is not the
least in this revengeful conspiracy, be sure you use him roughly that it may
cause a quarrel, and young Rivers will take fire at the least spark


If scurvy usage will make them quarrel they shall not want it, I hope Tripes is
not to learn to use a man scurvily, I Am sure I have practiced these 20. years,
and there is never a one that ever I arrested yet can give me a good word; The
Players brought me oth' Stage once I thank them in a Play called the Roaring
Girl, or The Catchpole, he was a pretty fellow that acted me, but he came
short of the rogueries I have done


You have sent a Porter.


I saw him deliver the Letter.


It Is very well, 'cause this is a large room, you shall retire into a less,
I Will show them up stayrs, and pretend that Mercurio and the Sergeants are gone
into the City to see some friend of his for bayl, and will be here presently,
which to countenance you shall leave your pint pot half full of wine, your
empty foul pipes and the candle, and when I shall give the watchword you may
enter


And now you talk of the watchword, is the Watch set at Cripplegate?


And has been this half hour.


If there be but the least disturbance, let your boy be ready to call the Watch
up; can he frame a lie hansomly before the Justice next morning, I know the
Watch will do their parts, only they have one fault, which is to charge every
offender with one way of assault, that must be avoided


I warrant you for the boy Ned.


Anon, anon Sir, Did you call Mr.


Yes Sir.


Is thy name Villainous?


No Sir, it is a nickname my Mr. has given me.


But thou must now deserve it, can you if need be, abuse. I mean accuse a
Gentleman before a Justice of peace, to do a courtefie for a friend of your
Masters


Of what degree must the fault be?


Of what degree? a learned boy, oh my dainty pickpocket, he has faults at's
fingers ends, the devil has given us such equal gifts; let me hear your
degrees my fine villain


Time runs away, let me hear some of them presently.


Why sir, I can accuse him for picking of your kocket calling you son of a
whore Rogue, Knave, Cheat, striking of you with a sword, with a staff, with a
pot, a Candlestick, or stabbed you with a Tobacco-pipe, or -- are you married


Yes Sir.


Then if you will Sir, I Will swear I saw him lie with your wife.


No, no, hang you, I Will have thee swear to nothing that appears like truth, you
shall find cause enough to swear I Will warrant you, and so we shall have all


I should know this boy, a pretty ingenious Lad; Do thou not know me, Jack?


My name's Richard Philpot, I was born in Turnbal-street


It Is true, it is true, do not know me Dick Filpot?


No truly Sir.


How does thy father, is thy mother living still?


No Sir, she is dead; did you know her Sir?


Did I know her, I a dozen years before I knew thee, why thou art now, let me
see, 1641. thou art now some 14. years of age Dick


I am almost 15. Sir.


I think thou wantst half a year on it.


No Sir, I want but a quarter.


I, thereabouts, did never hear thy father speak of me Dick.


No indeed Sir.


I am thy Godfather.


Are you Sir?


Am I quotha, who would have thought to have seen this boy here; do thy duty, I
shall find something for thee


Pray Godfather give me your blessing.


Good boy, thou art no Brownist, I see thou can kneel to thy Godfather for a
gift, so can some of them too for thy hopes, but y faith boy I cannot part with
money at this time, thou shall have my blessing


Ha, ha, ha.


A pox of your blessing, I thought how well you were my Godfather; had it not
been for the hopes of your money I Will have seen you hanged ever I Will have
believed you, I know where my Godfathers are, though I Would have satisfied your
humor for your money


Boy look to your charge, they are come.


By and by, anon, anon Sir.


Go all of you into that room.


The watch-words shall be, I wonder he stays so long.


I would not have you seen.


No, I Will warrant you.


You are very welcome Gent.


Are you the Master of the house?


Yes Sir, for want of a better.


It may be so; what shall I call your name?


My name is Hemlock Sir.


Thou art half hanged, thou have an ill name Hemlock and a Vintner, bless me
from thy wine; did there not a couple of Sergeants bring in a Gentleman even
now


Yes Sir, are you the Gentleman he sent for?


Where is he?


He and the Sergeants are gone into Cheapside to a friend of his that he hopes
will bayl him, they will be here presently, this is his room


Why would not that friend come hither?


He was in bed Sir.


A poor excuse, that man will scarce be bayl, that will not have his bed to
save his friend


I hope Sir you will do him some good, he is a pretty Gentleman, it is pity he
should suffer


It is indeed, has he paid the reckning.


No Sir.


How long has he been gone?


Half an hour Sir, I wonder he stays so long.


How now, who are these?


Is your name Mr. Flylove?


Yes Sir.


I arrest you at the suit of Alice Drowzy.


Arrest my friend?


Then let me suffer too.


Murder, murder, murder, go run and call the Watch, my husband's killed.


Beat down their weapons, I charge you in the Kings name to keep his peace.


The Kings peace we will keep.


Or we shall force you.


Did nothing urge me to it but your force, I should not fear to break it.


Sir you have killed the Master of the house.


I Am very sorry for it Sir.


That is no satisfaction.


He is a man I meant no hurt to; Sir do you send for Chyrurgeon to night, I Will
send you one to morrow, I guess the danger of the wound; Come Sir, where will
you conduct us


To the next prison.


Oh that is the Compter.


Come then we will altogether and make a merry night, no question but we shall
come off to morrow; I pray Mr. Constable will you come for us betimes


You shall have all the favor I can do you, I am sorry for this chance.


Faith so am I.


And I am sorry too but cannot cry,
Now Is my plot made perfect, all the wheels
Are in a general motion, I must follow, I shall
Never think they are in prison, till I see them
Within the Compter-gates.
My singing Gallants your mad misdemeanor,
Shall bring you now to sing the Compter tenor.

Blood of the Rivers, thou beginst to droop,
Thy soul seems not so active as it was:
Where be those capering pieces of pure flash,
That made the genius of the place grow Comic?
By the wanton memory of Chaucer I could turn Poet,
And write in as Heathen English; and as bawdy;
I Will not to bed to night.

Nor I by Jove.


By Jupiter nor I, shall we be jovial; why should we not; conceive this place a
Tavern, one place may serve for two uses; some conceive it the habitation of
the sorrowful, and our free spirits shall convert it to a Paradise of delight;
Pray Sir what hour of the night is it


Past twelve Sir.


It is an age to morning:


prithee cheer up the woman, she droope.


Do thou want rest?


Yes Sir, far more then sleep.


Thy mind's disquiet then, prithee be cheerful,
Sorrows are momentary as well as joys;
Were I in the bottom of the Ocean,
I Would bear my head up, till my own weight sunk me.
Sir, can we have some Wine.

I Will ring the Bell for you, they are up at the Feathers-Tavern; they lie at a
safe Guard, they' I have their money beforehand


With all my heart, we shall not be mis-reckoned then, here is money for a
pottle of Canary, the night is somewhat cold, and Sack is sprightly


Hugh, Hugh.


What a Hugh and cry you make, I have stayed up these two nights, you are all
mad I think, will you not go to bed to night


Prithee honest Hugh (if thy name be so) fill us one pottle of Canary, let us
have clean pipes and Tobacco


Where Is your money?


At hand, at hand, my midnight Drawer.


Who Is that, Mr. Rivers?


I, do know me?


Do I Sir, I filled you many a gallon of Wine at the Bear upon Fleet-bridge.


Oh, thou art an honest blade, I know thee, prithee fill me good Wine.


The best in the Sellar.


Hark you sir, is there not a French knight in the house?


His name is Sir Reverence Lamard, he lies two stories higher to the street.


A lamentable story! can you not invite him down?


I Will try Sir.


Thou Art an honest Keeper.


These Keepers have been rumor'd to be churlish; I like this fellows humor
very well


Oh what a crew of Wine-Leaches shall we have stick upon us to morrow morning
for our Garnish, we are of the Master-side, your half-crowns a piece Gentlemen,
I know the order, I have commenced in this College before now


A pottle of Canary in the Compter, s^^re.


In the Compter you rogue; Sir cannot you show us a better room.


It is too late Sir, pray be civil, and keep your own room:


Is this the end of our travail? Here s a Health to our good deliverance.


By the blood of Bacchus I Will pledge thee.


Come I Will begin a mad Health, and let every man have his fancy.

Here Is a cursed to all those
That are Prisoners foes,
And the Coward that goes
To undo men for blows,
Who does basely expose
Their bodies to throws,
In a Prison where grows
Infection to the nose,
And from top to the toes
Are tormented with woes,
Till, be it spoke under the Rose,
They Are meat for the Crows;
Confusion to those
In Meeter and Prose.

Pray drink off your cup, and we will all keep the close, here comes my white
Knight in his Lawn sleeves, now if a Quaker saw him he would take his shirt for
a Surpless, and condemn it for a Babylonish Garment, or in good sooth and
verily a wicked and superstitious remnant of that foul slaps the whore of
Babylon


Begar dat whore of Babylon be one of me Aunts.


Monsieur you see we are come to bear you company, you shall not engross the
prison to your self


Me tank you for noting, you can no give me de sheat now as you have from (vat
do you call de fader of de pig


The father of the Pig; a Hog.


Hog, hog, hog, as you gave me de sheat at Hogdown.


Well forget it, there was no hurt meant, on my credit, there was another cause
you must not know


Begar but me do know already, you carry away de Surzhons vise, begar he be
horn-mad


How came you to know this? would he reveal it?


Yes begar and more to, 'twas he dat make Drowzy de Kishin-wensh to arrest
Monsieur Flylove


The devil at last is even with us.


Room for my Lord Judge.


How now what is the matter?


This noise is in the Kings Ward; it is termed the Hole.


But are they allowed to be so loud there.


We cannot check a Custom they have used,
Which is when a new Prisoner first comes in,
They have a Scaene of mirth, where one is Judge,
And sits a trial upon life and death.

May we not see them Sir.


I have no privilege to open Wards at this late hour oth' night, left some
combustion happen amongst the prisoners, which my strength will be too weak to
pacify


My life for yours no danger Sir.


Ye appear honest Gentlemen, and I Will trust ye.


Thank you Sir; come Monsieur will you walk down.


Zhentlem me vill vait on you to morrow, but me mus com to bed; but me have
anoder plot in my head begar


Well Monsieur good night* take rest, and sleep secure.


Awee Monsieur tres humble serviteur.


What is your name my friend?


You must tell the Steward your name, you will be the sooner entered a member of
the Sheriffs-Basket, there is (my friend) a strange miracle in our living, we
never want meat yet keep continual fast; and yet all that fast, you may see by
our Clothes we are loose enough; we live in imitation of the Owls, we sleep
in the day time, and revel all the night: Some beds we have for Gentlemen of
quality, as my self being the Lord, Steward Rentfree, Constable Lazy, and
Chamberlain Jaylbird


Gentlemen, I was a Page to a Knight that was a prisoner in this house Sir Rev.
Lamard, my name is Wildfire


Prithee stand farther off, thou will melt me else.


My Lord begins to hiss.


Gentlemen of the Kings Ward let us consult upon the business, it is for the
good of the Hole, and of the whole House; let us for once be wiser and honester
then ever we have been, there may come much mischief by this Wildfire, if he
stay long he will consume us, and every creeping thing about us, our beds being
all straw is very combustible; the very blowing on's nose blows a bed up


There Is a Bug upon your Honors doublet.


Is there but one, give it Wildfire, he is fit for nothing but to receive my
Moabites in reversion, they may live upon him like so many Salamanders; I will
petition to morrow for the discharge of Wildfire, he shall not stay with us, we
must have Wildfire put out, it is pity such a spark should be in the Compter


Stand aside, here comes the Gentlemen Rats, it is most fit I give them the
first salutation; Gentlemen you are most unhappily incountred

I do most unfortunately thank you Sir, we come to see your Revels, are they
ended? are you my Lord


Yes Sir, he is my Lord.


Well Gentlemen we make bold to visit you, and (to be the better welcome) we
have brought with us each man a bottle of Canary; who is that knocks


It Is somebody at the Compter-gate, some more Rats I believe.


Bring them hither of what degree soever.


I, I, Hole 'um, Hole 'um; Rat, tat, tat, this is the City-Mous-trap; here do
we lie at a sure ward, revel all night, and breath defiance to the Watch and
the Constable; we have suffered under the terror of Authority, and now we have
got the Law in our own hands


A Rat, a Rat, a Rat.


What are they, Citizens or Gentlemen?


No, no, they are neither Citizens nor Gentlemen, and yet they are a company
for Lords, they are musical Rats, singing Rats, men that are come to keep time
in the Compter; they are crowding in, therefore you that mean to express your
activity, prepare and be in readiness, a man in prison may easily do his
sink-a-pace


These are the Blades that were with us at Hogsdon; this was some precise
Constable, some brother oth' Family, that sent the Musicians to prison, or else
some joviall Humourist that had a mind the prisoners should be merry to night;
well my Masters, since you are here, strike up courageously, here be Gentlemen
have a mind to discover their footing, you shall not lose your labor, I Will pay
your Fees in the morning


We thank you noble Mr. Flylove.


Gentlemen, throw of your bottomless pantoffles, and let us to it, here is Sack to
cherrish us when we have finished


Gentlemen, we thank you, when we are at liberty, we will send you something worth
your estimation, in the mean time drink that


I come, let us go, I do not like the fume of this close room; how fare you Mrs.
Trimwel


Well Sir, but that the scent is somewhat noisome, the room above, from whence
we came, is sweeter


Come, we will go up again then.


I, I, let us go, god-night good friends.


We thank you Gentlemen, we will drink your healths to morrow morning.


In the morning Music we will keep our words with you, but I shall talk with you
for the trick you put upon me at Hogsdon


It was no fault of ours indeed Mr. Rivers, we will mak't appear to morrow.


Well, well, good night.


Good night to you all Gentlemen.


Come my Masters we that were Dancers will make an equal division of the
Gentleman's bounty, here is ten shillings, and we are six on's


12. d. a piece, and the rest in drink among the prisners


I like the motion well my equal Steward, here is some Sack left, that we will
drink with the Musicians, and excuse their Garnish in the morning


Agreed, agreed.


Let us consult farther in our withdrawing room: How now Chamberlain cannot
you leave your old trade? must you be filching? would thou undo a poor
Commonwealth at one pull thou unconscionable thief, but I am too subtle for you
sirrah, you cannot deceive me; The devil take me if my Angel leave me


Nobly spoke my Lord; room for my Lord there.


It Is very light, begar me sall be discover; now if my string do slip, down
goes Sir Reverence upon some Wash-mans head, and begar dat vill bewray all; I
can see noting but de Fiddles in de Prison; if I sall break my neck in sundra
for my liberty, begar my adversary make dice of my bones, but I sall cousen
him, for my bone crumble to ashes: So, so, vas very fast, and so fast, as me
can, me vill down; Begar me tink it be somewhat strange dat me mus come to be
save by de Rope, but if I be taken, for ought I know I sall be hang in de Rope.
I care not me sall


A saucy Constable to question my lodging, cannot a man go home to his house in
peace? Is it not sufficient that I can carry my self to the Compter, but I must
be beholding to an enigmatical Constable, and his mischievous Watch; a man can
no sooner come near them, but who goes there? come before the Constable; Come
before a Cuckold, Oh such a rogue would be hanged; Let me see, where am I? this
is Woodstreet, whereabouts is the Feathers-Tavern


A pox for you, you be too near de Feder-Tavern already, and begar now I see
him, dis fellow be prisoner in de Compter, but I have an invention he sall no
spy me, begar me vill creep into dis Bush, and ven he be gone me sall go down
courageo


This is the Compter where many a man lies with a heavy heart, I have been a
prisoner this two or three years, yet I walk abroad at my leisure, and am as
drunk as a devil for my pleasure


Begar me have extreme need to make vater, I sall pish my breesh, Oh Diabolo I
sall be found, begar me can stay no longra, me sall burse


I will knock up this rogue Hugh at the Feathers; Hugh, Hugh, you rogue rise,
my name's Pimpwel, you sleepy rogue rise and let me in, must I wait upon you
with a pox to you. Nouns what is that


Begar now I be undon in a pissing vhile.


You son of a Bachelor, do you throw your Pispots upon my head, if I could
find stones I Would break your windows, but since I cannot, I will even make bold
to set fire of your Bush, then throw your water and spare not


Oh Mordieu, me sall be burn in de Bush, or be hang in de Rope, I vould I were
in me shamber again


What Is here, a Rope? some prisoner


From whence?


A private chamber in the Masters-side.


A prisoner, a prisoner.


Look, look, here is the Rope.


Run up to the Masters-side, see if the French Knight be in's Chamber, his
Action is 6000. l. we are all undone if he escape away


I, I, we are all undone, if he be gone here is Rope enough for us all.


Pox on you for a drunken rogue, where have bin?


Drinking wine in bowls boys, I am almost drunk, but what shall we do for the
prisoner, shall I run after him


Which way is he gone?


The Lord knows.


Hallowgh?


What say you?


The French Knight is escaped, you must make swift pursuit, he cannot be gone
far


Pluck up the Rope; look well toth' Gate, Pimpwel run you to Cripplegate, you
to some other Watches, and all the way you run, cry out a prisoner


A prisoner, a prisoner.


Oh the great pox run with you all, vat a fear have dey put me in, begar me
vill not stay, it is very light, I see no passenger, dis vas de bravest time:
So, now me are down, futra for Keeper; begar me can no shuse but laugh, how dey
runaway from me to find me; Oh me brave bush! Fish vay sall me take to be
safe, me mus come no near Cripplegate, nor Sheapside, I sall take some udder
vay, the devil is in me if I come again; Farewell good Compter, I am not loath
to part from you: I remember two line of an Englishman dat vent from de Prison,
dey var des

Dis House mus be let at a miserable rate,
For I have left my Shambra, any man may have it.
Farewell Comptera.


Can you direct me to the hapless lodging of young


He lies in the Masters-side, he is a Gentleman whose misery works much
compassion in each Officer, I would my power could save him


Thank you Sir?
Such worthy wishes in such men as you,
Who bear a function of that cruel nature,
Being so rare, appears most excellent;
Pray tell me Sir, how does he take his sufferings?

I think he is in love; he is often heard
To sigh a Ladies name, and sing sad Sonnets
In dissolving passion,
Such as might melt the Tyger-cruelty
Of men turned Tyrants; thus much I observe,
The prison does not fright him from his rest,
Like his divorce from her whose name he sighs so;
I Will call him if you please, yet it is somewhat early.

Sir, I give thanks
Unto your loving diligence, and with your leave,
I shall conceive it but a friendly Office,
To spare his labor, and walk up to him.

Those stayrs direct you, turn on your left hand.


Are you the Keeper Sir?


I turn the key, my Office is as much
To let men out as in; I take no pride,
To stand 'twixt men and freedom, suck a Keeper
I am, and would be thought.

Heaven be thy Keeper, and grant thy place corrupt thee not; pray Sir, was
there not brought in amongst other Gentlemen, a prisoner late last night,
called Mr. Flylove


Yes Lady.


How could I speak a word in private with him? the business which I have
concerns his freedom


I shall be glad to call him, -- Mr. Flylove.


Mr. Flylove, Mr. Flylove.


What a noise you make, I Am become a man of calling now; who is it would speak
with me Sir


Here Is a fair Lady, I Will leave you to your opportunity.


Gramercy honest Keeper: How now, who is this? How my blood startles in me on
the sudden


What, do I fright you Sir? I come to see and comfort you with my best love to
file your Fetters off


Such charitable language, and such face
Had beauteous Bellaflora, to whose soul
Mine was contracted, but my breach of vow,
Joined with the infamy of this Ioath'd action,
So lately done, has sent her far from me;
This is the pleasant widow we met at Hogsdon,
I remember now;
But see how guilt will fool a man, I was
Admiring how you thought to find me here.

Some other time I Will tell you, if I may
(Without the breach of modest manners) ask you
What is the cause of your imprisonment?

What a question's that? I Will lie in the Compter all my life time, e're I make
known the cause that laid me here, a toy, a trifle, for nothing but disputing
with the Constable, here is Jack, Wildblood and Frank Rivers in the house (three
merry boys be we) here is the woman too, will you go see them


No Sir, but if the cause of your restraint from freedom be of that easy
value, you will be gone within an hour


I, I, within this hour at the farthest.


Poor man, how thou deceiv'st me and thy self,
I as much blush to let him understand
I know the cause of his affliction,
As he does to reveal it; if you please
I Will stay till you go off.

You may stay this twelvemonth for ought


You need not let that fright you, I have so much skill, although a very
unexperienced woman to tell you, whilst you are under the command of any
Justice for the breach oth' peace, you are not liable to any Action


She says true, where the Devil got you so much law?


Come, come, I know the cause that keeps you here.


How! I am sorry for that.


Is It not a woman's Action?


A woman's Action.


I have hit the mark, and I could name the party.


Lady I Will take my leave, I Am called above.


Indeed you are not Sir, pray stay a little,
I know you think the fact you have committed,
To be of that vile nature, that you blush
To tell or think I know it; you the less
Stand in my condemnation for the ill,
Because 'twas acted on so much deformity,
It makes me think some Witchcraft, drink, or madness
Possessed you at that time; they being removed,
Your penitence brings back your ravished worth,
And you are man again, but the nice winner
Of every fair one's a judicious sinner,
And in that judgment multiplies each fact,
And finds his Tragedy in the last Act.

This circumstance confirms your knowledge of it, And I am sorry.


That I know it.


It Is true.


But if you please't shall not be the worse for you,
Would I were beautiful enough to please you,
Or had a mind that you might think so fair,
To merit your best wishes in the bliss
Of sacred Wedlock, you should then be sure
To shake this bondage off.

Pray let me pause.
My former rashness may take license for it;
I am in prison, and the Law exacts
My body for a year; I could produce
Such bayl as is sufficient for my freedom,
But I will perish ever I reveal my scandal;
This woman's fair, and has a face so like
To one, whose memory I owe my being,
I know not what to answer; Then again
It Is for my freedom, from a bondage which
May ruin soul and body; I Am resolved,
If Bellaflora knew it, so would she,
And pardon all, which works my Liberty.
You do not ask me this to try me, do you?

No by those joys I wish for.


Nor tell me of my fact, or of your friendship,
At every angry occasion,
Which the best married pair seldom avoid.

May all my life be made of discontents,
And they in old age kill me, if I do:

How near she comes to Bellaflora still,
In all her noble actions; If I could
Believe the Pythagorean axioms true,
Of transmigrated spirits, did the Grave
Contain my Bellaflora, I should think
This frame contained her soul, the Gods would sure
Consume me, if this Contract I now make
And seal, this virtuous woman were not lawful:
By all the joys eternal, by the hopes
I have to live a life that is long and blessed,
To see a numerous issue fairly bred
In all their actions, showing still the minds
Of their long sleeping Ancestors, I Will be
Thy husband, love, and life, I Will marry thee.

This day.


This very day.


Stephen Flylove, the Constable's come.


Sir, the Constable waits for you.


Delay not, in the mean time I Will bail you here, Remember Sir.


I do.


Adieu my dear.


W^lcome to liberty my Cavaliers,
The gaudy portalIs of the red-cheekt morn,
Stand wide to entertain you, and delight
Your sickned senses with the bright display
Of glittering Phoebus.

Your genius soars too high, you will melt his wings.


I am aerie as Philetus when he tripp'd
Over the ears of Corn, and never bent head;
I could outrun Atlanta.

Atlanta? within these two hours a Cripple could
outrun thee, and give thee five in the fifteen:
But Stephen, why so stupid? rowse thy spirit;
Can Liberty discomfort, or the exchange
Of grates for fragrant fields dismay thee thus.

Faith I am dull, and I have reason for it.


What is the melancholy matter prithee?


That which will move you all when I shall speak; Mercurio's dead.


Dead!


He was well last night.


He died this morning.


Oh my poor lost friend!


His cruel Creditor is paid; Oh my Mercurio!


I knew 'twould dull you all as well as I,
This day his Funeral is, I hope you will be
The sad spectators of his Obsequies,
Raynard the Keeper will instruct you when,
And tell you more, pray go and leave me here,
I have a sadness that concerns not you,
I Will put it off and meet ye.

Good morrow Stephen.


Farewell friend.


Good morrow Mr. Flyl.


Your humble servant; Laday what stay you for?


Where would you have me be?


Where you please; I cannot command your being.


What means my Love?
Your speech betrays some discontent in you.

Yes, I Am troubled, Oh my sweet Bellaflora!


Who do you sigh for Sir?


A friend, a friend, an honest friend of mine.


This is a time to banish discontents.


No, no, to increase them.


It is an hour was made to consecrate our holy contract


Why I, I told you so.


Will you not marry me.


I will not break my faith to Bellaflora
To gain a Queen, a Goddess.

Then you have plighted faith unto another.


Yes cunning temptress I have.


Why do you blemish my well-meaning heart,
With such a title?

Could your securer subtilty presume
On no deceit but this? Had you proposed
Out of some Magazine of rarities,
Gold, Silver, Jewels, though they were as precious
As Erephile's Bracelet (which she sold
Her dear affecting husband for) I had
Esteemed them all as nothing, but weak I
Too fond of (what I now curse) Liberty,
Must sell my peace, my life, and much I fear
My bliss eternal.

Oh you Angels, where
Lives there a faithful man, why did you make
This solemn Contract to me.

'Twas a bad protestation, and the breach
Is better then performance, yet because
You shall not say I cheated favors from you,
Resign me to my prison, where I Will live,
Only with thinking of my Bellaflora,
Her very name shall purify the air,
And make a dungeon grow as fragrant,
As Meadow Flowers in triumphant June.

Thou common man that do two contracts break,
I have so much to say, I cannot speak.

Like men for Robberies that lose their breath,
I leave the prison to embrace my death.

You are very wanton Frank.


Now I have got thee single, shall we try
An amorous duel for a boy now, I Am all fire,
And could perform an act 'bove Hercules;
Glue thy red lips to mine, and let us prove,
The jocund pleasure of the billing Dove.
Again, once more, you do not do it heartily,
We Will make a numeration from a kiss,
Shall pose Arithmatick.

You Will tell of this.


Steal, and reveal; he is a bold thief indeed.


There are too many such.
They cannot have a favor, -- such a one.

I, such a one.


As you imagine, but they must reveal it,
As if it were a second sporf to tell it.

They glory in their actions, and would prove
How much they merit by their Ladies love;
This I disdain.

Do ye use to talk in your sleep, you will tell it to your bedfellow.


You are too jealous of me.


Come then, I Will try thee; kiss me,
That Is the first peal to bed, but I will not trust ye.

Why do you mock me thus?


The cause being so great, I may be doubtful,
You Will have another Love, then out goes all,
But use your will.

To do thy will a pleasure, shall we be private.


As private as you please.


Such privacie best pleases.


Come let us away then.


Stay (upon better thought) I have


How?


Prithee be not angry, I am very loath to go to hell so easily.


What pretty change is this?


I would it pleased you, pray satisfy one thought and I am for you.


Willingly.


And truly.


By my life I will.


Did never silken Gallant with queint words,
A fair proportioned body, and smooth chin,
Such as you women like, tempt you to this,
This feat, before I moved you.

Never.


Never, prithee bethink thy self, you doubt me still.


But you suspect me more, I vow never.


How fain would I believe thee, if thou swear'st true,
You Are fitter far for Heaven then this act,
Which thou shall never be guilty of for me;
What pity it is to take fair new blancht Lawn,
And sprinkle ink on it; let not your husbands doubts,
Bred by your frequent absence, and such hours
Civility never warranted, urge you
To acts that cause his shame, and your own shame.

Whats' your intent for this.


I Will tell you.
The guilty giddy people, who conceive
All acts more vile then they appear,
Have spread an infamy upon us both,
Which if unquell'd, in time will fix a stain,
(though causless) which no Rethorick can charm
To alteration; thus in brief I Will do,
By a most queint invention I have thought,
I shall return you to your husband, who
Shall with his love, not jealousy, embrace you,
And to the bold ears of the rumorous world,
Declare his error, and your innocence.

A very modest way to do me mischief,
I thank you for your love, your honest love.

That you will confess hereafter, will you go?


Yes Sir, I Will wait on you;
Am I betrayed by tricks? a Letter opened,
The secret read, and then sealed up again?
Inquisitive fool, thy dear experience shall
Instruct thee, what a fate he undergoes,
That turns the fierce stream of a woman's love:
I could be less impatient had he spoke
From knowledge of my guilt, then know my will,
And afterward disclose me; well I Will disguise my anger,
And frame a fierce revenge shall make thee tremble,
Women act mischief sure when they dissemble.

Is the French Knight in prison, what is his debt?


Six thousand pound they say Sir.


It Is a great sum I have been wrong enform'd,
'Twas credibly reported on the Change,
He had a free estate, his Traffic great,
A most unquestioned credit; and does all
Conclude in this, they did not mean me well
That tempted my belief thus.

Shall my suit have gracious hearing yet Sir?


What for Mercurio?
Because I was so near to be deceived,
With the feigned riches of a Bankerupt,
Would you betray your self to certain beggary.

Will you be pleased to free him from his bondage?
It is reported he is sick, that place
Will kill him, where is then your satisfaction?

He cannot want a friend for twenty pound,
I will not lose my money, I Will take time,
If he can fit me with security.

Alas he is not able.


What are these; hark you friend, whose body's this?
And whither carry you it?

Here Sir our journey ends,
It is the body of deceased Mercurio,
A prisoner at your suit, who dyed this morning,
And thus according to an ancient custom,
We bear him to you (all that is left)
His bones to make you satisfaction,
Because his poverty enforced him (living)
To keep your right from you; withal, our form
Is to deliver to the Creditor,
At whose peculiar suit the debtor dies, -- A bale of Dice.

Strange custom; Heaven! now it does amaze me.


I have a little speech that must excuse
The expenses of a bought Oration, which concerns
His miserable end, and cause of it, and I have done.

Oh my Mercurio.


Look to the Lady.


When he came in he wanted all that makes
Man in this Age substantial (Friends and Coin)
Which want was soon attended with these, neglect and hunger
But then the perturbations of his mind,
His sighing silence only could declare,
As if they were too vast for elocution;
Great griefs are tongue-ty'd, there is no clamor reared,
So deepest waters crawl along unheard.

Most reverend piece of sorrow, whose wet eyes
Drop, as they would command another Spring,
To raise the body from its earthly ruin,
To heat and life again; what friendship had you with him?

Sir, I am one,
That wish I had such neerness to his virtue,
As to his blood; a poor unhappy Kinsman.

There Is so much Magic in your sorrow Sir,
All my attentions charmed.

Like men who are near drowning, catch weak hold
On broken boords, on sedge, or any thing
Disastrous chance betrays to the wild waves,
He sends for me that could but grieve his sight,
With the wet sorrow in my eyes for him:
Instead of Chambers hung with Tapestry,
Arras, and Attick pictures, the dark walls
Are easly beautified with Chalk and Cole,
According to the melancholy fancy
Of the sad Prisoners, where the numerous beds
Show like so many Graves in a Churchyard,
With the men rising out: No Canopies
But what the charitable Spider wove,
To save their always watching eyes from danger,
For they are un-us'd to sleep.

Alas poor men.


In such a state as this my kinsman lay,
My poor, poor kinsman.

Thou weep'st too fast old man, I shall not overtake thee.


I figh'd, sat down by him, and did observe
The manner of his Chamber-mates, and one
Beloved above the rest, as it appeared,
Was cherisht with a friend that happy day,
Who said he came to see him, could not stay,
Although some Messenger fix times had been
To fetch him, but in vain, was never within
After he heard the business, though his ear
Was within hearing of the Messenger:
At last he was within, without all doubt,
Because he heard the prisoners going out,
Gives him a shilling, bids him have good cheer,
He was glad to see him, sorry to see him here,
And so he parts, protesting for to come,
He knows not when, this is his wretched doom
Of undone debtors, and my kinsmans Tomb.

Since bleeding cleanses veins, I hope to find
The Expense of tears will purify the mind:
What is this writing Sir?

It Is his own hand,
One hour before his death he writ Epitaph.

With his own hand? pray read it.


I shall Sir.


I which once with life did move,
Here lie Coffined up, to prove
Till death I was Splendora's Love.
I that have with many groans,
And wet eyes washed the prison stones,
For want of Money, pay my bones.
Let none with exclamation call,
Upon my name, and scorn my fall,
I owed but little, and paid all.
Thou have paid all indeed, thy breath and all,
Is It were no fin I could bestow a wish,
That life would visit these cold corpse again.

Where shall we bury him Sir, the custom is
To bury men in debt in the New-Churchyard;
Shall we dispose him there?

No, since he is dead he shall be well interred,
Though half my estate waste for it, I have cause,
He loved Splendora, poor Girl she will dye too;
To your charge I commit this forty pound,
To provide mourning; I Will have Surgeons strait,
That shall embalm the body.

You show your self a noble Gentleman,
Whose memory we will pray for; here Frank dispatch.

It shall be done.


Sir, here be Gentlemen that loved him, are
Willing to express their loves, they have a Dirge.

They are welcome, I Will attend their ceremony*


Is all performed?


To a tittle, here is a discharge from the Office.


Then rise from thy dead sleep thou man of care,
Thy debt is paid, there is joyful news for thee.

Am I deluded,


Not a jot, come old man embrace him for your son,
Though he be poor, he is a Gentleman, and meritorious.

But art thou living?


I, you know it well enough, you shall even go together for your plots, I have
paid my self it seems


Your Money lies in the Office Sir.


It Is very well, who comes here?


Ware ho! here comes a mad man.


Yes, a horn-mad man, Myruon are you there?
And your Sweetheart Rivers, I must part you;
Unhand him impudence.

Sir, if you lay a violent hand on her, I touch your heart.


Gentlemen, Is there law or conscience in this?
To keep a man's wife, as they say, in spite on's teeth.

F. Rivers is more kind then I expected,


Your jealousy has wrackt her virtuous name,
And by my life she is free from actual ill.
As e're thy mother was.

He Will never believe you,


No, he shall I warrant you,
E're I commit her to your cursed usage,
I Will see some reformation of your life.

You Will see it.


Yes Sir, I Will see it.
My Mothers daughter shall not be exposed
Unto your giddy humors.

Your Mothers daughter?


Yes Sir, my Sister.


What trick is this?


Pray what may I call your name Sir.


I never feared it, though I have disguised it,
For some ends which best concern my self,
Before I went to France, men that would know
By my own name to call me, called me Brooks.

My brother Frederick?


The same Sister; I must talk with you.


Oh, my shame! Brother I hope you will forgive me.


This is no time nor place for our contention.


Who comes here?


Either my eyes deceive me, or here comes
The form of Bellaflora.

What do you gaze? Do you not know me Sir?


Yes sure, I know you; Are not you Bellaflora?


That is my name.


I know it is, but were not you disguised, and called Fairchaste?


I remember your amorous Alphabet.


O my strange excellent fortune; can you forgive all?


Yes, and seal my self thy own for ever.


My dear Cousin.


How Sir?


It Is so indeed, the Wildblood's out, this is your cousin Worthlove.


Welcome from France good Cousin.


Fair cousin I thank thee, this unity contents me.


As I live here is Sir R. Lamard that broke the prison, how the devil dares he
venture


Be your leave Zhentelmen, room for Sir Reveren. who be come to claim his Lady,
his Madam


How came you out of prison Sir.


Begar me pay de money, and now me come to your dautera.


Now you have paid away your money, the truth is, Sir she is disposed of to
another


And we will dispose of you that can break prisons.


Begar here be de Keeper, vat fall me do now?


Nay, you are fast enough, we will take an order for your sliding.


Zhentelmen vill no man be my bayl?


The sum is too great for me.


Pray Zhentelmen.


Not I.


Nor I.


Nor I.


Come Sir, you must to prison again.


Mus, begar me vill not.


Then we must force you Sir.


You Pimping rogue, why do you tug me thus?
You know me well enough.

What is your tongue changed, what tricks have you?


I Will speak with Mr. Nice. Pray Sir, peruse that Picture and Letter.


It Is my wives picture sure; Splendora, was not this your Mothers picture?


Yes Sir, the very same she gave my brother, when he went to Paris.


And this my hand, the Letter that I sent him.


And I your son, come to crave a blessing.


And with my heart thou have it.


Will Nice.


Mr. Brooks your servant.


Noble Mr. Nice.


Hah, my politic Stephen.


No, my politic William.


Sir I am yours, and joy to see you in England.


Welcome to London brother, you can court a Lady most exactly in broken French.


I am glad it pleased you sister; Keepers I Will quit you presently, that Action
which was entered was a plot of mine, to have my father match this Gentleman
with my kind sister; there is no danger in it I can assure you


Well, I Am contented Sir.


You are wags I see; were you sent seven years ago France, and come again to
cozen your friends, but Heaven be your joy. Come, cannot you express a little
of your French action with these Ladies, shall we not have a Dance


And very fit, methinks the time requires it.


With all my heart.


And mine.


Every man take his Lady then.


Gentlemen, you have done exceeding well; if you please to walk in, Dinner at
this hour waits for you


Come my mad merry Mates and fellow-Travellers, let us in and chat the story of
our Travels, the tricks of our Disguises, with the queint and jovial Humors
which we have found in the Compter

To marry and be civil our next care is,
We now have done enough for Youths Fegaries.

WEll; How is it now? we heard you laugh, but pray.
Was it at us, the Poet, or the Play?
The Poet's full of joy though, to the brim,
And says, he is sure ye do not laugh at him;
Because, he finds you only laugh at that,
Which he desires may be worth laughing at:
And then he heard you Clap; that Verdict stands
In Law, he has it under all your hands;
Unless when we were freed from Woodstreet Den,
You had a plot to Clap us up again:
But waving all, we (without more suspense)
Accept your Clapping in the better sense.
This is the sum, I have no more to say,
Either for Poet, Actors, or the Play:
If his dull Humors please not, we implore,
That you will go all toth' Compter and see more.
THis Comedy, called, The Walks of Isling ton and Hogsdon, With the Humors of
Woodstreet-Compter, may be Acted: This 2. August, 1641

Henry Herbert.

