IF you have any service to command me
At Sevil, honor me with your Commission,
To morrow I embarke, and leave the I Will,
Until you Mart returns, and games renew.

But first you will kiss the fair hands of the Nymph,
And take her pasport with you?

That Is a duty
I dare not fail in, though my interest
Were not concerned in it. I intend this day
To carry her my casket of my richest
And choicest merchandise; when she has bought
What best pleases her fancy, I shall be
Dismissed, having no more commodities
To sell unto the Shepherds of her Court.

Have you sold well?


To what end should I feign?
The trade goes well enough, I complain not:
Rich Rubies, Pearls of price, bright Diamonds,
Store of fair Coral, costly Ambergris,
Portraits, and other such dainty devises,
Have passed through my fingers at good rates:
Diana's festival is still kept solemn;
And as the games which fail not every year
To be renu'd, invite unto those woods
The neighboring Shepherds, to dispute the prizes
Proposed on those days, I saw among them
Some noble strangers clad in pastoral weeds
That for the honor of this Island chose it
Their sanctuary and repose.

You need not
Wonder at this, the place which they have chosen
Denotes their judgments; here ambition
Has no employment; if at any time
We sigh here, it is for love, no other passion
Is seen among us; though this Island be
A part of Portugal, we have our laws,
And Empire to our selves; she that rules here
Has not the name of Queen, we subjects are
Our Sovereigns companions, and her virtue
Makes us to taste so much repose, that she
Has put the Sheephook into the hands of
A hundred Hero's, who wearied with Laurels,
And the noise of the war, are here retired
From the four corners of the World: She rules
So sweetly, that crime only feels her anger.
And as she is descended from the blood
Of Zoroastres, she knows well the virtue
Of Herbs, and the influence of every star;
She understands the secret mysteries
Of Magic, and sometimes makes use of it
To serve her interests; there is no Prince
Nor Monarch that stands not in fear of her.
And suffers her not to reign in peace
For his own safety.

I know this Asyle,
And charming residence looks not with envy
Upon the Court of the King of Portugal;
Besides I am not ignorant that the fair
Ismenia, drawn here, by the sweet report,
Of these enchanting pleasures, to enjoy them
In quiet, left the favor of her Queen;
And that this beauty by a sudden change,
Adds no small luster to this Paradise.

See where she comes, Diana too with her,
I must in private speak unto this fair one;
An interest of love obliges me
Continually to make her my devotions.

Go Sir, and prosper, may your Saint prove sweet
And gentle as those South-gales I expect
In my embarkment. --

TRue, I hate that horrid noise;
Now my free thought released from such a trouble,
Enjoyes it self.

So soon to quit the sports,
What was your fancy?

To avoid discourse
That troubled me, and here I meet with new.

Can such a subject as brings homage to you,
Produce the effect you speak?

What does not please me,
Both troubles and offends me.

You will one day
Quit those disdainful rigours?

Yes, when you
Have neither hope, nor love.

Do You entertain
Every one thus that loves you?

If he be such
As you, I use him just in the same manner.

Surely the Shepherd Clidamant speeds better.


It Is then assuredly because he does not
Resemble you.

He entertained discourse.
With you in gentle whispers at the Sports.

I do confess it,
We talked of you, and of your little skill.

Your subject was more serious, without doubt.


What ever it was. yours, I am sure, offends me.
Remove this hated object from mine eyes;
Your presence will at last provoke my anger.

Can one displease you, speaking of your Loves?
Thou Husband'st for him that so sweet discourse.

Every one knows that who but speaks Melintus,
Speaks jealous.

It is no secret what men think of thee;
Every one knows, that who speaks but Ismenia,
Speaks cocket.

Really thou have much reason
To be afflicted at that late discourse,
Clidamant merits much, and I Will oblige him.

Leave us.


He does expect you, and I trouble you;
But we will find out a way to cross his fortune.

He thinks that Clidamant enjoys my love.


Thou have no reason, Shepheardess, to draw him
Out of his error: in the mean time will thou
Not yield thee to the faithful services,
The prayers and tears of the devout Thersander?
Will thou not love him yet? he that encouraged
By thy fair presence, only to please thee,
Has gained so many prizes, who to give
Thy anger no pretense, thought he loves much,
Can more be silent, since the ardent flame
Where with he burns for thee, is only known,
To me, unto Thimantes, and thy self.

Never speak unto me of it.


What! still cruel?
But hearken, I will give thee an advise
Shall touch thee; whilst we may, we should lay hold of
The flying time; he only makes beauties,
And he destroys them; in the lovely season
That thine lasts, use the gifts which nature gives thee;
Thou will one day lose this fair luster which
So charmeth hearts, and be an object of
Comtempt, as now thou art of adoration.

Rather that love, whose Orator thou art,
Yet know his use so little, does times office;
'T is he that withers a face; the cares,
The troubles and the griefs, which by his means
Possess a heart, deface the lovely features,
And mow the flowers* he is like time the Tyrant
Of all things; he in a few days dryes up
Our Roses, and our Lillies.

Shepheardess,
Such fear has small foundation, quit this thought
For thy own interest; when love is once
Lodged in the heart, the ey has then more light
The face receives thence its full perfection;
Then we esteem us, then we please our selves,
And know out utmost value, we correct
By art even to the least defect, we call
Our Glass to counsel in the ordering
Our gate, our carriage, and our countenance;
There our eye cheers with smiles, or kills with frowns,
Or faintly darts its glances, or with strength,
Either to wound near hand, or further of;
Therefore once more for thy own interest,
I say unto thee, love, at least a little,
Thersander that adores thee.

Really,
Thou do surprise me, to speak thus unto me,
Thou that have never yet had love, nor thought
Tending to that sick passion, thou that make
So many Lovers only for thy glory,
Without remembering one of them, thou that
Please thy self by turns in their discourse,
Thou that wilt gain all, and conserve thee nothing.
Thou suffer Thimantes to adore thee
To day; but tell me will thou entertain
His love to morrow?

I love, but I have always had my method
In love, the Lover that is troublesome
Unto me, is my Lover for a day;
I burn not yet for love, not do I sigh for it:
I make a sport on it still, but never a torment;
In thrusting no one of, I Am every day
Attended by a multitude of servants
That present courtship to me, and all strive
Who shall be foremost, on whom I command
And reign as Princess; they suppose they please me
In putting up my praises; when I go
Unto the Temple, they fail not to follow,
And carefully to tread in all my steps.
I am not pleased to see in such brave Shepherds
A troop of slaves attending on my train;
I please them all in flattering their desires:
I Am much delighted, when I make them jealous,
Provided that their jealousy extend not
So far as, to betake themselves to arms
For the honor of my beautyl; this high point
Of evidences might, perhaps, enrage
Even all my other lovers.

Ha! how ill
Thou know love, and his maxims, I behold
Thy changes as so many crimes; for my part,
If my heart were taken with an object once,
I could not pass from love unto contempt;
I should be fixed unto my first Idea,
And that God wholly should possess my thoughts.

Well then, Diana, love, if thou think fit,
Beyond the grave, and make so fait a fire
Arise beneath thy ashes.

Oh, alas!


What signify those sighs?


They signify
The sorrow of the heart.

But whence proceeds
That sorrow? is it from thy brothers death,
Or from some lovers? come, deal plainly with me,
Do thou not love Thersander yet at last?

No, I assure thee.


Speak, I Am very secret.


I Will tell thee then, in Sevil I received
Both life and love, Cleagenor, Ismenia,
Is the name of the Conqueror, whose image
Is graven in my heart.

O Gods! how this discourse
Has cosened my thought, I was about
To give instructions; -- but pursue.

Our parents
Approved our love, and the day for our marriage
Already was appointed, when Nearchus,
Provoked by an infamous desire,
Came to solicit me unlawfully
In favor of his flame; this favorite
Unto the King after a passion painted,
And colored with sighs, called his presents
To the assistance of his faith; but this
Proving effectless, he resolved my ruin;
He came with open force to satisfy
His beastly and unruly appetite;
And to that end would carry me away.
My Mother having notice at that instant
Of his design, made me to take a drink,
To frustrate it, and then, her subt'le policy
Spread through the Town the rumor of my death:
Indeed the virtue of this drink procured me
So long a sleep, that it appeared to be
The sleep of death; Nearchus terrified
With this sad news, came to behold it painted
Upon my face; remorse of conscience
Within his heart then, quarreled with his love:
His sad despair armed him to kill himself:
But whilst his soul was troubled herewith,
I was conveyed secretly into
A Bark; scarce had I yet finished my sleep,
But at my first waking I saw my self
Upon the Sea. My Mother then related
The whole adventure to me, and the secret
Imposture of my feigned death, when suddenly
A storm brake the discourse, horror and death
Marched on the floods: alas, what shall I say?
Our vessel being carried by the fury
Of The winds and waves, was split upon a rock,
The several pieces floated on the waters;
I know not which of the Gods took care of me
In putting one under my trembling hand,
Which making me pass on those moving graves
Through the disturbed empire of the winds,
Carried me to the shore in all appearance
Devoid of life; here in this quiet Island
Of Erithrea where Melissa raigns
My body found a receptacle; she
Returning at that instant from the chase,
Perceived it lying, which the enraged Sea
Yet threatened on its banks, and that same God.
Which would complete his miracle, inclined
Her heart to pity at this spectacle:
She caused me to be carried to her Court:
It is unto her succor that I owe
The remnant of my days: here I first changed
My name, the better to assure my flight,
And so to disappoint Nearchus pursuit.

How Shepheardess, is not thy Name Diana?


No, Celia was my true and only name;
But for my safety I made to Metissa
A feigned relation of the miseries
Of my sad life; since she received me
Into her palace, where I live with her,
And am now of her Court. Seven times the Sun
Has finished his Carier, since I have seen,
Or heard news of my mother.

Was Cleagenor
Informed of all this?

Oh, alas! this is
One of the point that causes my affliction:
Cleagener surprised by the same
Imposture, came to see me in my bed,
As in my grave: I wonder that the noise
Of his redoubled cries brake not my sleep:
The heat to revenge me dried all his tears:
He found his rival, and assaulted him;
They fought on equal terms; Nearchus fell
Under his arms for dead; Cleagenor
was forced to fly to avoid the fury of
The Offended King: his sudden flight gave not
My Mother opportunity to inform him
(As she intended) with the fiction
Of my pretended death: since his departure
It Is now seven years complete, in all which time
I Have heard no news of him; so that I know not
Whether I mourn the living, or the dead;
In the mean time to weep my fate more freely,
And to conceal my miserable fortune,
I feigned a Brothers death.

I Am sensible
Of thy misfortune, and will bear a part
In thy sad grief, if that will make it less;
I no more now condemn thy sighs, nor tears;
But yet at last preserve thy beauty from
Those murdering sorrows; in this doubtful case
Fix thy fair thoughts upon some other object;
If death has seized thy Servant, sure thou losest
Too many tears and sighs; or grant he live,
Is It probable that he will keep his constancy
For thee whom he thinks dead? but here is my Lover.

WHat business brings thee hither?


Here I come
A little to divert my thought.

What thought?


It Is a disease which does assault my sense.


What is it, without more circumstance?


My plaint
Without words would express it; at the sports
Too many Shepherds had unto my grief
Too long thy free ear, and perhaps, thy heart;
A World of people pressed round about thee:
The Shepherd Dorilas, me thought, discoursed
Too long with thee, I saw so many others
Prostrated at thy foot --

Without more words
Thimantes is become a jealous fool.
Since thou will love me, learn to know me well:
Thimantes I am free, and will no Master;
I Will never depend on any but my self.
Tell me, I pray thee, did I ever promise
To speak to none but thee? do thou imagine
So vainly, that thou art the only Lover
That serves me? have not I yet some which ought
To be conserved? and amongst all the Shepherds,
Whose faith I have received, if I should open
My mouth and eyes on none of them but thee,
And that one of those days thy mind should change;
And mine change too, (as all this well may happen)
Would all the others, jealous of this kindness
Expressed to thee thus in particular,
Be still my Lovers, though I had lost thee?
And if my liberty were not exposed
For all, which of them would commiserate
My fortune in thy loss; I think upon
The Event of things, which thou can not assure:
At least if one quits me, another takes me:
Consider if this humor pleases thee,
If thou can serve me all thy life time thus,
And not be jealous; if thou can, hope one day
Both mouth and hand, and happily the heart
May flatter thy affection.

This way
Seems very strange unto me, but almost
Every fair evening some appointed place
Of meeting seems t'assure me of thy love
Sufficiently, and not to flatter me
With frivolous hope.

Yet hitherto it is
But airy words.

I hope all things from time
In waiting for that day, our names engraven
In every place, will speak my love, Ismenia,
I promise --

But no more, here comes Thersander;
That Shepherd, whose enflamed heart thine eyes
Has rendered as hes --

Well Ismenia,
I leave you.

This is too much rigor, trust me,
At least afford the face, if thou deny'st
The heart.

OH stay, dear object stay, thou that art cause
Of all my torments, I have but one word
To say before I dye, the Nymph has crowned
My valor with these prizes, here I come
To lay them at thy feet, with them my heart:
If thou will triumph on this festival day.
Suffer at least thy conquest in thy sight,
That Is all the ambition of this captive heart.

Captive to me? if so, make it change Master,
I freely do release it; break its chain
Thy self, if thy design be not to have me
Free it with my own hand.

Alas! it is not
Its liberty that I desire.

Then let it
Live still a slave, and sigh.

How, Shepheardess!
Refuse a heart, this precious present which
Is always worth a Temple, and the Gods!
Think well upon it, it becomes thy justice
Not to despise this noble sacrifice,
Since I give but the same victime and incense
Unto the powers above; in my opinion
Our Goddess in the Temple is less fair,
And thou do bear the bright name of Diana,
As well as she.

Since this rich present is
Of such high value, as it is worthy of
A Temple and the Gods, I believe, Shepherd,
That it becomes my justice not t'accept
This noble sarifice, and I should wrong
Our puissant Gods in daring to partake
Their glory, and to share their incense with them,
My name's Diana, to thy eyes I Am fair;
But I am not a Goddess like to her.

Although thou have no Temple, nor no Altars,
Thou make thy self adored; it is to day
Thy festival which I have celebrated:
I have no other worship, nor no other
Diana, the fire of my love is not
A profane fire, and if some spark thereof
Warm not thy breast a little, I must suffer
The violent heat on it

Rather I advise thee,
Quench it with my contempts, this remedy
Will cure thee, that thou shall complain no more.

Good Gods! what remedy is this which thou
Offerest me here? I must dye, shepheardess,
If thou cur'st so; flatter at least, I pray thee,
With on sole word the love which thou have raised;
If I Am, not happy, make me think I am so.
Alas! I cannot hear a single syllable
To succor me; if thus thou curest, Shepheardess.
I must dye, there is no prevention for it

Why carriest thou a heart still so rebellious
To love?

Why do thou persecute with scorn
This faithful Shepherd?

It is best be gone.


Yet thrust of thy disdain, if thou will spare
My hand, my death, finish the forming of
The sword that kills me, one word more of hate,
And I die presently before thine eyes;
Speak, answer me.

No more, here comes the Nymph.


Happy arrival, which has freed me from
So great at touble!

Well for my part then,
I Will try the temper of the marble rocks:
My plaints may pierce them, though they could not move
A Virgins heart to pity, much less love.

SInce a full year and more that I have governed
This happy Island in the right and lawful
Line and succession of my Ancestors
By the death of my Sister, and since first
Diana's feasts were celebrated here,
Never so many Laurels crowned your heads,
Nor ever any day ordained for pastime
Has entertained mine eyes with such delight.
Every one striving to bear hence the prize
Proposed to his contention, showed his skill,
Both at the Course and Lute; how hand somly
Thersander did behave him at these exercises!
With what a grace he acted every thing!
How charming was his port! and if I may
Say what I think of him, he must be sprung
Either from Kings or Gods; how happy is
Thimantes in his friendship!

This happiness which I enjoy's not new,
It has a longer date then from to day:
His name is precious to me; 't was my fortune
To have the benefit of his acquaintance
At my last voyage, I saw his arrival
Form his own native country at the Court
O'th King of Portugal; the sympathy
Of humors which one man has with another
Tied us together in so firm a friendship
That having met him sad and full of thought,
I prevailed with him as to bring him here,
In hope that in this quiet region where
Melissa reigns, he should lose all his grief.

Indeed although that prosperous Shepherd has
Received all the prizes from my hand
Wherewith he is crowned, I find him notwithstanding
Still melancholy may not this be in him
Some sad effect of love, blessed Shepheardess,
Who ever thou art! thrice happy is thy fortune,
In which this noble stranger bound his choice!
He is so far above the common merit,
That a Nymph should not much abase her self
In loving him.

Indeed he merits much,
And we esteem him all, we love his virtues,
Without being jealous of them.

Clidamant
Comes nothing short of him in my opinion.

Thimantes too will go as far as he.


Another time, Melintus without doubt
Will perform better.

Yes, when you shall turn
Your eyes on that side.

Shepherds, once again
Prepare, I pray you, for the Nuptials
Of Thirsis with Parthenia; Niece, that Shepherd
Is worthy of you, and you are not ignorant
That I intend, as soon as he returns,
To make him (as I hope) your happy husband.

Yes, if my heart can suffer violence.

In the mean time, let us go unto the Temple.
Our thanks and our devotions to pay
Unto the Gods on this so glorious day.

It Is true, Thersander, I have done for thee
As Much as possibly I could, I made
Thy sighs, thy constancy, thy faith appear
For to persuade her, but I lost my labor,
Diana is insensible, her heart,
Which loves sweet applications cannot touch,
Among so many rocks, is become rock.

What shall I do, Thimantes? what a rude
And rigorous fortune steers my destiny?

Quit that ungrateful, and come forth of slavery


How shall I come forth? I Am born miserable
Under the frowning, and the fatal aspect
Of an ungentle Star, Which in despite
Of all my studies to defend me from it;
Pursues Cleagenor under the name
Of poor Thersander.

What is that I hear!
Good Gods!

Thersander, what haft thou discovered?
Has thy own mouth betrayed thus thy secret?
See into what great danger thy imprudence
Puts thee at present; fear thou no more,
Nearchus, and his power?

No, I fear nothing
After this sentence, but seek death, for since
It is resolved by fate that I must die,
What matter is it, by what arm it be,
Whether Nearchus, or Diana kill me.

Oh Gods! how happy is he? --
Has not she
For whom thou die had some intelligence
That thy heart loves elsewhere? if it be so,
And that thy inconstancy procures thy torment,
Thou wrongfully accusest her of cruelty.

Quite contrary, this love therewith thou see
My heart disturbed, is a sure testimony
Of my fidelity: it is true, alas!
I sometime loved an object of such beauty,
That the Gods never framed so fair a piece:
The Roses and the Lillies formed the color
Which died her cheeks, and in hersparkling eyes
The Sun was painted; to express unto thee
Yet better her divine perfections.
Diana is her Portrait to the life
Celia is seen in her; she like Diana
Had a Magestick carriage, she had
A mouth, and eyes like her, she had an air,
Fierce too like hers, but amiable; lastly
In every thing she seemed Diana's self:
My heart is constant therefore as before,
Since still I love her in her living Portrait.
I thought at first then, that her death was false,
And that Diana was that lovely object;
But when I few Diana entertain
With such contempt the fervent love wherewith
My heart was taken, when I saw her rigours,
And infinite hatred, I perceived my error,
And said this is not Celia; so that
I saw well by her cruelties indeed
That I pursued her picture, and had passion
But for a Portrait.

What! is Celia dead then?


Alas! that is my affliction, I saw her
Stretched out upon her deathbed dead, Ismenia;
And more dead yet then she, I saw those places
Shine with a certain rest of brightness which
Her eyes had darted; presently on this
I had a Combat with Nearchus for
This charming Beauty; that proud favorite
Unto the King by infamous desires,
Formed him an object to his filthy pleasures,
This outrage was intended to her sweetness:
We fought on this occasion, it was
My fortune to disarm him; but the death
Of Celia, and the anger of the King,
(To save me from the rigor of the Law)
Enforced me to a flight, and made me wander
Seven year from Province unto Province: lastly
Wearied to see the Court of every Prince,
I thought to free me of all dangers here
Under the feigned name of Thersander, and
The habit of a Shepherd: to disguise me
Yet better, the afflictions of my heart
Have changed my Visage.

Have thou nothing with thee
That formerly was Celia's?

Yes, one day
I received from her hand this precious pledge
Of her unfeigned love, behold this Portrait,
And judge, I pray thee, if I love Diana,
Or Celia.

Let me have this Portrait; with it
I Will cure thy evil, Diana seeing it
Will become gentle, I Will go show it her.

What will thou do, Ismenia? but I see
Diana: O Gods! end my misery.

I Sought thee every where. -- to Ismenia.


You will oblige me, -- to Ismenia.
Ismenia, to restore my Portrait to me.

Troublesome Shepherd!
I have much to say -- to Diana
To thee in private, therefore let us enter
Into this Wood. --

Show her that Portrait! oh my martyrdom!
Traitrous Ismenia, is this that faith
For which Thimantes always answered
To me for thee? yes it is by thy counsels,
Thimantes, only that my seduced soul
Left her the conduct of my faithful love;
Nothing from thee or me can work upon her,
She jeers at all; but let us find her out.

I see we are private here, we may speak freely.
A Mistress yet at last sighs for Thersander,
And one too in this Island far less cruel
Then thee; accept his service, and embrace
His faith: this portrait which thou see here,
He received from her as a faithful witness
Of their reciprocal and mutual fires.

What do I see?


That portrait (as I take it)
Whereof Thersander is so proud.

I gave
Such a one to Cleagenor; Ismenia,
Who gave it thee?

Cleagenor himself.


O Gods! what say thou to me? thou art in
An extreme error.

I tell thee again
Cleagenor himself gave it to me

This discourse holds no credit.


Every day
Almost I see him, and thou see him also
As well as I.

I comprehend not these obscurities.


He loves thee, and thou fliest him.


I fly
None but Thersander.

Well, henceforth accuse
None but thy self of these disasters, it is
The same Cleagenor that loves thee,
And whom thou fli'st.

Cleagenor! Ismenia;
That cannot be, is it possible that I
Should have been two months without knowing him,
For so long it is since he arrived among us.

Thy grief hood-winck'd thine eyes, thou could not see him.
Think thou that since those seven years thou have lived
Upon those fair banks, time that changes all things,
Has not yet changed a face? there comes Thersander;
Take a full survey of him, whilst I hold him
In some discourse; make show as if thou would stenter
Into that Wood, and have a care thou do not
Discover thee till I have ordered
Thy meeting with him.

Happy pledge of love!


THou see what she has done; unto Diana
Sh' 'as given the Portrait.

See she enters there
Into that Wood.

A word with thee Thersander,


Perfidious, finish here thy crime, and be
My murderer; strike, strike this heart, I pray thee,
That hopes no more; but by what interest
Have thou betrayed me?

Why complainest thou?


O gross dissimulation! dare thou yet
To ask what is my plaint?

He has his gate.


Thy heat hears nothing, give me leave to speak.


Yes, to feign more, and to lie at thy pleasure,
Am I obliged still to thee for my life?

How soon love does degenerate into folly?


Thersander, hear her.


What is it she can say?


Since thou art so obstinate, let thy love go
Which way it will, I Will have no more to do in it.

Speak then, what will thou?


I have naught to say now.


Thou would speak to him.


'Twas to laugh a little.


I pray thee, speak unto him.


I conjure thee,
Ismenia, in the name of all the Gods,
Jeer not my Passion.

It is now my turn
To be perverse.

I hear thee, speak, what sai'st thou?


Since thou will have it, know then that a Rival
Has caused thy grief and torments.

How, a Rival!
At that Word I Am all fire, a Rival!

Yes,
A Rival, good Thersander, but a loved one.

What! loved of Diana?


Yes of her,
And more too, of thy self.

That Is very strange;
How should I choose but bear a mortal hatred
To him my Mistress loves; who ever he be,
I must revenged die.

If this should be
Cleagenor, O Gods! how is he changed?

Where is that Rival?


With thee, Thersander;
Thou would defend him, if occasion were,
At the expense of all thy blood; believe me,
Thou never leavest him.

Without dissembling, -- to Thimantes
Tell me Thimantes, art not thou that Rival,
She means? I think thou art my friend, deal plainly
And freely with me, art not thou that cruel,
That false and traitorous Rival?

Answer him,
Ismenia.

Well, what will thou say at last?


Thersander has for Rival in his love. --


Speak, whom?


Cleagenor,


Cleagenor!
Ismenia, ha! my joy, sure, is extreme;
True, I confess, I love this Rival equal
Unto my self, and if he may be loved
Of the object whom I serve, I will adore
My chains Without condemning her of rigor.

Thou have lost nothing by this bout, thy fortune
May create envy, fair Diana has
Yielded to Celia's portrait.

Who, to see
Those decayed features, could have known that face?
But my love has at last drawn them afresh
Within my memory; I must draw near him,
And yield to my impatience.

Pardon me,
I cannot believe thee; but here comes Diana;
See if her eyes have n't the same cruelty,
Always the same pride, and the same disdain.

Ismenia, I am come to tell thee something.


Me Celia?


How, Celia?


Yes, Celia.


Alas! I Am in an error; it is her eyes.
Her gate, her countenance, but not her heart.

It Is she, Thersander, whom thou do behold,
It is very self.

How! is it a custom
To call forth from the bosom of the Grave
Departed souls? and by what privilege
Has that God, who at the eternal sleep
Presides, ordained her waking?

Though thy faith
Finds this point strange, is not love strong enough
To make thee to believe a Miracle?
Cleagenor sees me, and knows me not:
How comes it, is my Portrait false? have J
No more artractions? see if it be thy Celia,
At least if it be not she; it is no more
That beauty which was late so cruel to thee;
Cleagenor!

My Celia!


Is it possible,
O Gods! that J should see again what J
Best love in the World?

Is it you that J see?


Take heed, be moderate, one may die with joy.


Ismenia, follow this example here;
Grant only at this instant but a kiss
To my impatience, see at last Diana
Cease to be unkind.

What! does the object rouse thee, and the example
Provoke thy spirits? thou will have but one kiss?

I will be satisfied.


Give me then
Some verses, or at least a nose gay of
The choicest flowers.

Ismenia, I Will not fail
To bring them thee.

Then trouble not thy self,
The kiss is thine.

Will thou with hold from me
So long what is my due?

It will be better
When it is much expected, and longed for.

Behold my whole adventure in few words.


I Have made thee too a full description
Of my misfortunes thou see how I feigned
(To give my grief full vent) a Brothers death
In weeping of my lovers.

What felicity
Do I enjoy now?

Use your utmost skill
To make it lasting to you, and beware of
The fickleness of fortune, and her wrongs.

What! have we yet any thing more to fear?
Is not that blind inconstant Goddess weary
Of persecuting us?

Love is a child,
He must be governed well, Diana's beauty
Has gained her lovers, they may hurt, Thersander;
Melintus has a subtle wit, and we
Both know he loves Daina, and besides
Is jealous of her; fear some foul play from him,
If thou appear his Rival; he disposes
The spirit of Melissa at his pleasure;
When he shall see you serve as obstacle
Unto his love, he will take speedy order
For your removal.

But to hinder him
To hurt me, I conceive Diana has
No less power on the spirit of the Nymph.

But if the Nymph loves thee, as I observed
Her heart expressed some such matter lately,
When at her last return home from the Games,
Her free confession to us all, declared
How much she did esteem thee, but at last
With such an esteem that love followed
Close at the heels in plain terms, and indeed
Spoken by her of purpose, if she loves thee,
I say (as I Am confirmed in that thought)
How will thou steer thy course?

It Is very true,
Her discourse comes into my memory.

O Gods! what is this you utter?


For my part
I begin to believe it, and remember
The passage too, I fear all things from thence;
This is the only mischief we should shun.

What can she not do against your interests,
When your refuse shall come to arm her anger
Against you? Know that with a single word,
In The twinkling of an eye too, she can calm
The floods and make a mutiny amongst them,
Call froth corrupted bodies from their graves,
Make their cold ashes speak, and their pale ghosts
To walk; these were the secrets, Zoroastres
Taught, whilst he reigned, to his posterity;
She is descended from him; and to give
Her self content, will make use of her art
To serve her passion.

I know that her skill
Extends to Magic. Yes I fear her love
With so much power, and yield unto thy counsel
Advise us what to do.

Disugise your selves
Under the names of Brother, and of Sister,
In the mean time we will spread abroad the rumor
Of this event that every one shall hear it
Within the Island.

J approve this project.


My life lies on it.


I go to begin
To lie unto Parthenia.

JSmenia,
I would speak one word with thee but a moment.

Immediately when you have born a part
In the contentment of this pair; Diana
Has for the future no more cause to weep
Heaven has been pleased that she has found her brother.
It is this happy Shepherd, they acknowledge
Each other.

This event, J must confess
Confounds my spirit; Thersander found her brother?

Yes Nymph, it is the same,
For whom my grief was hither to extreme.
The Gods at length have heard my prayers and sighs.

Yes, Madam they have granted our desires.


J'm very glad on it, and my soul is ravished
With this good fortune of our friends, which makes
Our lives content, Diana will obilge me
If she please at her leisure to inform me
with the discovery; but acquaint the Nymph
Therewith, and to that purpose go to see her.

We ow that duty to our Sovereign.


In the mean time Ismenia and my self
May entertain each other in discourse,
Thimantes, J believe, will not be jealous.

Let not a third come, Madam and J fear
Nothing from you. --

Ismenia, J know not,
If J may safely tell a secret to thee,
Alas!

J know it well, since the heart sighs;
When one would say J love, and dares not speak is,
The heart at the named point gives an Alas.
Have not J well divined?

Ismenia.
I do confess it, see too, if thou can
Divine the object that procures my grief
Let me not speak him, spare my cheeks those
blushes.

I cannot, a sigh carries not so far;
You love; but what more, is beyond my skill
To understand, unless vour self unfold
That sigh unto me by its cause.

It Is true
I love.

But whom?


It Is --


Outwith't.


Clidamant.


Behold a handsome way to name a Lover;
Ha! how you fear your lips should touch upon it!
One must draw 't word by word out of your mouth;
You have then but one lover; really
It Is well as't happens; had you lists of them
As I have, which I name, and reckon over
Every hour of the day, your bashfullness
Would well become you; love is a fair fruit,
But then it must be gathered, modesty
Leaves it to fall and wither, but I pray you
What will Melissa say to it, who intends
To match her Niece to Thirsis?

Oh! I hate
That Thirsis, and shall be even in despair,
If the Nymph force me to observe my duty
In that particular; yet I would keep it
Without disturbance, if the love I bear
To Clidamant should not return me his;
For to speak truly I am violent
Where honor does engage me, therefore would I
Have his heart to be sounded, and as I
Find it disposed, I should pursue my love,
Or quench my flame.

Speak unto him your self,
Nothing's more easy.

But, Ismenia.
Thou have a wit would help me; if I should
Speak to him, he has little understanding
If he should not know that I first was taken
And I should sin against the rule of maids
To make such a confession.

You may write then,


That is all one, still the same point of honor
Forbids it me; my Letter would discover
My love, and make him boast thereof, perhaps,
To my dishonor, if he might have once
That mark on it in his hand.

Let him then
Divine it, if he be Astrologer.

Treat not my passion thus with railery.


I must then serve you in it, I perceive;
Well I Will about it with my best invention;
I Will write a Letter to him, and invite him
By a feigned love, as soon as it is night,
To meet me at the Echo of the Garden,
To entertain us there.

So in my absence.
Thou shall discern his thought.

This business
Concerns you, Madam, and requires your presence.
You shall speak softly to him, and in those
Sweet moments, you shall understand much better
What his thoughts are, and thus you may your self,
To find out if he loves, speak of your self.

Thou will be present too?


Yes, J'l so well
Contrive it, that he shall believe undoubtedly
That it is I that speak.

But how can we
Speak to the Echo, for thou know the Nymph,
As soon as it is night, retires her self,
And then we cannot come there, what devise now
Have thou that we may speak to him?

Cannot we
Speak to him from the terrass which joins close
Unto the Garden; you know that you can
Conveniently come there at any hour
From your apartment; it is upon this ground,
And these conjunctures, that I Have ta'n the plot
For my invention.

J admire thy wit,
It Is wonderful industrious and ready.

I Will write the Letter here before your eyes,
Behold the paper for it.

How, these are
Thy writing Tables!

They can speak of Passions
Discreet and secret; J'l about my business,
And use my smoothest style.

Especially
Appoint him well the hour and place of meeting:
How redevable am J to thy wit
For this great favor? what do J not ow thee
For this good office, thou giv'st me again.
Life, and repose.

See what J write unto him
In two words for you, they are very pressing,
And will engage him to betake himself
Unto the place appointed to know more.

It Is very well; it rests now how to giv' 't him.


Leave me the care of that; but here he comes.


YES, J have heard Diana is his sister.


Madam, Melintus and my selfare going
To seek Thersander, to congratulare
With him his happy meeting with his sister.

Thersander's happy, and thou art no less,
Since thy good fortune offers it self
Unto thy hand, from whence thou mai'st expect
All that thou can desire without that jealous.

Come, let us go, the Nymph expects us.


Having no opportunity at present
To speak unto thee, read, J think 't will please thee.

Read it, J think 't will please thee, what in the name
Of wonder does she mean?

Take but the pain
To open, and to read it thou shall find.

J think, J may make thine eyes withnesses
Of what it does contain, there is nothing in it
Secret of serious, Ismenia loves
To jest, and to be talked of; and this is
Some new piece of her wonted merry wit.

J am impatient, prithee open it.


Let me see what divertisement is here,
Which she expounds good fortune, what is this?

List of my Lovers by an exact order
Of Alphabet.
It Is very well put of;
But so far forth as J can see yet, neither
Obsetve J here Melintus or my self.

For my part, J renounce there; turn the leaf,
Go on.

Stanza's of Dorilas upon inconstancy.

It Is true, Ismenia thou are fair,
But more inconstant then the air;
And every Lover is a Mark
Exposed to thy humourous dart;
As soon as he meets thy disdain,
He flies to death to cure his pain,
And makes but one large step in all
From his bright glory to his fall.
With these defects yet thou can charm;
But I Will not love, for fear of harm;
Yet J approve all things in thee,
Yea even to thy inconstancy;
And will not, to incur thy hate,
Jealous Melintus imitate,
Whose humor every thing offends,
And nothing pleases but its ends.

Melintus, what sai'st thou unto them?


J see for what design she put those Tables
Into thy hand, J called her cocket lately,
And that, it seems, provoked her to return me
The injury with one of the same nature.

Sonnet of Silvio, my most faithful Lover.
A Madrigal of Thirsis, -- what is this follows,
Unto the Shepherd Clidamant.

Melintus,
Am J not purblinde, see if this name does Strike thine eyes thus like mine!

Nothing 's more certain,
It is addressed to thee; thou art more happy
Then thou imagin'st

As soon as the dark shadows of the night
Hang o'r the light,
At the Echo of the Garden let us meet;
But be discreet;
It Is love invites thee; more anon,
When w' 're alone.
Ismenia.

Prithee let me see them,
Grant me this favor -- not, then J, believe
Thou do disguise the truth, and read'st Ismenia,
When it is subscribed Diana.

Oh fond jealous!
How long will thou thus be thy own tormenter?

Yet show them me.


To cure thy troubled spirit,
J 'l first o'r come thy curiosity;
And since the discreet Lover, what vain heat
So ever presses thee, never shows thus
His Mistress name --

But --


Quit those blind suspicions; as soon
As it is night I Will go unto the Echo
Alone, and with our noise; I Am all a fire
To know what she will tell me, in the mean time
Let Us go unto the Nymph to seek Thersander.

To be more sure, and to inform my self
Yet fuller of thy faith in this my doubt,
I Will to the Echo too, and sind it out.

I Say to thee again that J receive
Much pleasute at this news, that thou, Diana,
Art sister to the generous Thersander;
He has informed me with the strange misfortune
Which separated on the churlish Sea
The Brother from the Sister, in what place
Upon a plank, escaped from the wrack,
The storm removed him from the anger of
The enraged Sea, what countries he has seen,
What pains and troubles he has undergone;
Lastly he named the happy fortune which
Conducted him to us here; I thank Heaven,
That made thee know him, I Am as sensible
Of this content as thou can be thy self;
He is so highly qualified, that he is worthy
The name of King, ye both shall find with me
A Sanctuary, and what ever fortune
Ye have, I will partake it good or bad;
My fortunes, ye shall bare too, so that all things
Between us shall be common: I believe
Diana toward me will be so well
Disposed of her part, and that whatsoever
Concerns me, will touch her.

Madam, I should
Be barbarously ungrateful otherwise;
I still remember that being on the Shore,
Cast as a wretched wrack there by the floods,
Expecting every minute deaths approach,
I met with you my port and sanctuary:
Oh that I have not power for all this goodness
T'express how much acknowledgement I have!

Thou have.


How Madam?


In expecting nothing
But death as I do now, thou can be to me
At thy turn both my port and sancturary;
Thou can subdue the enemy that braves me,
That of a Sovereign will make a slave;
He Is in thy power, thou can abate his courage.

What is that enemy which troubles you?


He Is one whose Magic can enchant the arms
Of the most Valiant; he can draw tears from
The most Heroic; nothing is so strong,
Which he cannot compass; and without respect
To any place or person whatsoever,
He equally distributeth his flames.

I know him not yet by this Character.


How know thou not that tyrant of great Monarcks?
That famons Conqueror of Conquerours,
Who notwithstanding is but a blind child?

If J durst to express me, J believe,
I know him.

Speak it freely.


I Am mistaken,
Or I have seen love painted in such colors,
Blind and a child, yet a great Conqueror.

It Is the same love whereof I speak unto thee


Who is the happy Lover that procures
Your martyrdom?

Alas! could thou not spare me
The shame to speak him? cover, gentle night,
Immediately those places and my brow
With the same color, so to please my heat;
I love; but let us finish since I Have said
I love, Thersander is my object.

What,
My Brother?

He. If his heart be a prize
Not easy to be gained, there is nothing which
I would spare for him, I would arm to have him;
Naught should oppose me, every obstacle
J would o'rcome; already by some words
Which he observed not, spoken by the bie,
My love was half expressed.

As he should not
Dare to pretend unto so great an honor,
He would be criminal, if he believed
To understand you.

Well then, be thou here
The mouth and true interpreter of my heart,
Express the kind heat of my timorous soul;
Tell him that I Am a subject to his Laws,
That he may boldly fix his thoughts upon
The person of Melissa, and not fear
To be condemned, that his ambition
May soar so high a pitch, and not be checked,
That he may sigh the same sighs with a King;
Husband thar heart for me, to which mine aims;
But let him not think that it comes from me;
My honor would receive a prejudice
By such a thought, thou only shall acquaint him
With this, as from thy self.

J understand you,
He must needs yield to this; I Will do your will.

As soon as he appears, I will retire me,
And from one of these places I shall hear
Every word that you speak one to another
In reference to my flame.

I should methinks
Act with more freeness, if J were to treat
With him alone.

No, J will hear my self
What he thinks of me, J can best of all
Trust mine own ears and eyes in this affair.

But, Madam, after all --


Shepheardess,
The thing's resolved, thou need'st not say no more.
Until he come, J pray thee, entertain
These woods here with some air, and let us see
If the Echo will answer to thy discourse;

Your prayer is a command; some plaints of love
Shall make the subject of it.

What thou will.


Ye Trees, ye Rocks, perfumed Valleys, sweet
And charming Zephirs, murmuring fountains keep
My griefs close in your bosom, you alone
Are witnesses unto my fires and moan,
Tell me if my sad heart, not daring to
Delare it it self, at least may sigh its woe?
May sigh its woe -- Echo.
Well then my sighs, make no noise as pe pass
The airy Regions only breath alas
Unto the heart that sent you forth; since I
Cannot speak to thee, dear object of my cry,
Let the Ecco, that is attentive, say for me
That if I love (as sure I do) it is thee.
it is thee -- Echo
DIana's here about, her voice assures me.


Thy Brother comes here, take this opportunity.
Be sure thou speak unto him loud enough;
Thou art my only hope; I go from hence
To hear, and to observe thee.

We are undone,
Thersander will discover all in speaking.

It Is now no longer time to utter sighs,
Let us resume our joy, and dry our tears,
Crown our sad spirits with flowers, and think no more of
Our passed misfortunes, let us form our discourse
Of the most pleasant thoughts, and let us chat
Of love.

Let me alone, I Will entertain thee
Upon that subject.

It belongs to me
To speak of that, and when I do consider
With what darts in my heart --

I know it well
It Is of a longer date then from to day,
That I have read thy heart; and I believe
That never any one has seen a Brother
To love his sister so.

The love wherewith
I am assaulted, and would make thee see,
Exceeds that of a brother, it begets,
Complaints and Sighs, it drives to despair,
And kills; the love we bear unto a Sister,
Makes not so many sufferings; but J love --

J divine whom, thou burnest with desire
To speak unto me here of Celiaes love.

Thou do divine right, J take a great pleasure
To speak of it with thee; methinks I see her
Still when J look on thee; how sit I find thee
To be the faithful guardian of my love,
Assured of thy fidelity, and that
Thy heart is always mine.

Thou need'st not doubt it.


O my dear!


Brother I Am not ignorant
How dear I am unto thee.

Thy fair eyes --


How! flatter and court thy sister
By thy discourse?

I cannot speak, unto thee
Thou interrupt'st me still.

The advice is worth it, and I Will give thee notice
That from esteem they pass to love for thee,
That scarce arrivedst thou unto this place
But thy good fortune without any trouble
Gained thee the conquest of a heart, for which
Great Kings will envy thee, it is Melissa's.

O Gods! what do thou say?


What does astonish thee,
I see how thou art troubled to believe it.
This great heart finds no place yet in thy faith:

To make thee happy in it, I must embrace thee.
Will thou not yield to this excess of honor?
Think that thy Celia in this conjuncture,
Has no resentment in her heart against thee,
Nor murmurs at it.

In this ecstasy
Wherein I am through this excess of honor,
I Am seeking of my self, but cannot find me.
How! dare to love the Nymph? t'aspire to her?
No my ambition's not so criminal.

Under those high respects, J see thy love.


How can I otherwise express it, Sister?
It the Nymph tempts me, and will make a crime on it,
It shall then have the name but of a lawful
Respect; and if I see occasion
T'express me further on this point, this lawful
Respect shall bear the bolder name of love.

Brotherm, it has that name, and J am ready
To boast unto her, her illustrious conquest:
But the Sun, J perceive, plungeth himself
IN the waters, and the shadows seize the tops
OF the Mountains, it is time now to betake me
Unto Melissa; but behold, she comes.

What serious discourse have you together?


Our subject is of Love, of Mistresses,
Of Servants, and of Sighs.

What! has Thersander
Already gotten him a Mistress?

Madam,
I have too little merit and address:
Besides to serve, to honor and obey you,
I have no other thought; our discourse was,
Your goodness for us, which my heart shall ever
Record as in a Register of Brass,
Where my acknowledgements shall never pass.

HO, Clidamant!


It is enough, let us go,
I hear some noise, and would not be seen here
IN rh' night. --

Ismenia, Clidamant! they hear,
But fly me, and the night robs my sight of them;
But this is not Ismenia, and I am
Deceived much, if I saw not the gate,
The stature, and the gesture of Diana;
Yes, Clidamant abused me with a lie,
Diana builds his fortune at my cost,
And that note which he would conceal from me
Without doubt was subscribed with her fair hand;
Yes, 'twas Dianaes, though he read Ismenia,
To spare my grief a little, and my trouble.
How simple was J that J followed
Not close upon his steps: but soft, methinks,
J hear a noise, perhaps it may be he.

O Night, lend me thy silence, make these woods
To hold their peace in the absence of the day,
And let no sound be heard here but my love:
At last I Am happily delivered from
A troublesome companion, that would
Obstruct my fortune, that same jealous Shepherd
Without respect and faith.

I Am much obliged
Unto thee for this noble character
Thou giv'st me; in despite of all my care
And cunning thou art come without my company
To see thy lovely Mistress.

I came here
To meet another person: for my Mistress,
I have already spoken with her fully.

Yes, if mine eyes deceived me not, thou talkd'st
Unto Diana, and seeing me follow,
Ye both fled at one time, these Woods concealed you.

Good Gods! what say thou to me?


But I Will be
More wise another time, and heed you better.

I understand not what this language means,
But this distrust does me an injury:
Why covet'st thou to accompany me thus,
Since the object that expects me, forbids it;
Desire thou to publish secret passions?
Ismenia in thy sight gave me those Tables;
It Is she that does expect me at the place
Appointed; for Diana, she knows nothing
Of this invention: if thou can, enjoy
That lovely Shepheardess and think not me
Guilty of any treason, I seek only
Ismenia, and shun society:
In this affair, Shepherd retire thy self
And leave my love in peace, why would thou do me
So ill an office?

This appointed meeting
Denotes some artifice; I observed lately
At our last Games the amorous commerce
That passed between Diana and thy self,
So many kind respects, such gentle glances,
And private whilsperings forming the suspicion
That still awakes me.

Cease to trouble me,
And thy self too unnecessarily;
Our discourse only was an effect of
Civility; I say again, I leave
Diana to thee; oh how perfectly
I hate those vain suspicions and condemn them!

Ismenia's very free she would have had
Boldness enough to express her love by day,
Why should she make choice of the night to speak it?
Why dared she not to utter it in words,
But writ it to thee?

In vain jealous Shepherd,
Thou ask me that question, all that I
Can say unto thee, is that I am sent for;
I cannot tell thee more if the occasion
Be good or bad; if J could satisfy thee
Upon that point, believed thou should excuse me.

I Will follow thee where ere thou go.


Oh Gods!
What a Tormentor have I?

I attend thee,


Then stay thou here, I Will leave the place unto thee.
I seign to withdraw, to withdraw him also.

What! leave thou me alone? and cunningly
Hid'st me those secrets, which yet I must know:
Feign as much as thou will, in spite of thee
I will sind out to which of those two objects
Thou giv'st thy faith, and do direct they vows,
I Will be a witness of thy secret love;
Another shall inform me on it, Thimantes
Will tell me all the Plot; to him I Will go,
And give him notice of the assignation;
He Will come to let me know sure, if Diana
Appears there; or if it be Ismenia,
J shall do him a mischief; when Thimantes
Shall see his Mistress appoint secret meetings
To others then himself at such an hour,
He has a poor spirit if he loves her still:
So shall I have pleasure in my resentment
In weakening the sierceness of Ismenia,
And of her servant, I Will to him immediately.

I Hear a noise, Ismenia, is it not Clidamant?


Fear not, we shall hear of him presently.


J hear no more noise, all is hushed and still;
Only the night, and silence reigns here.

Hark, J hear something, let us handsomely
Dissemble now.

Oh how I feel my soul
Seized with love and fear!

NO person follows me,
J am at liberty; jealous Melintus
Haunteth my steps no more.

Madam, it is he.


Well I Will go on to instruct me what Ismenia
Has to impart unto me in these Gardens;
Ismenia!

Clidamant.


Is it thee, Ismenia?


Yes, I expect thee.


Thou may have pretense
T'accuse my tardy coming, but a jealous --

It is enough, thou art beloved, assure thee;
Draw near; but let us speak soft, I Am afraid
We should be heard. --

I Am obliged to thee for this advertisement;
If J find at the Echo either of them,
Diana or Ismenia, believe me,
I Will faithfully report it, to remove
Thy trouble, if J can: Ismenia
Appoints me very often here to meet her,
Where, notwithstanding her inconstancy,
Her mouth in secret gives me the hope
Of a most constant love, and for a pledge
Of her faith, never any but my self
At those hours entertains discourse with her:
I Will to her now, and charge her with this crime
Of coming here without acquainting me.
I Will approach softly without making noise
Lest it might raise a scandal in the night;
Ismenia,

Some noise has struck mine car,
I Will return to you --

O what feat is comparable
To mine! Ismenia, come to me presently.

Melintus, really I can no longer
Suffer your importunity? why should you
Imagine that J am the Author of
Your trouble? J speak to no person here
But to the Shepheardess Ismenia;
J tell thee once again, she sent for me,
And J am certain that the note is written
And signed with her hand; it is true, this fair one
Sighs only for the love of me, her mouth
Has told it me already, and I answer
Unto her fires with a mutual heat;
Assure your self, and settle upon this
My faithful protestation, that Diana
Never made me sigh.

O most perfidious!


See what an injury you do me now,
To satisfy you yet more fully hold,
There are the writing Tables, see her name.
Examin't well, and take repose at last
Without disturbing mine. Do You place your glory
In persecuting me?

Shame of my love,
Depart my memory, J have wherewith
Both to reproach, and to convict thy falsehood;
And when I Have done it, treacherous spirit, I Will quit thee,
And then J shall be satisfied.

Melintus,
What is it thou murmur'st yet? J must break with thee,
If this strange humor lasts, in acting thus,
You will lose all your friends, your jealous head,
And strange fantastic humors, but he is gone;
I will return unto the object which
Both charms and loves me.

There Is our discourse,
Make an end on it thy self.

I Am rid at last
Of my impertinent; jealous Melintus
Has left me now.

Adieu, let us retire.
I Am certainly informed that thy ambition
Aspireth to Parthenia, in vain then
Thou hold me discourse.

In two words J will tell thee, that J have
Too full a knowledge of the eminence
Of her condition, as to dare to lift
My hope so high: Oh if I durst to love her;
But being less ambitious, J obey
My duty, and J better know my self.
Adieu until to morrow.

Oh Ismenia!
What content have J? and how skillful art thou
In this affair of love? I do admire
Thy wit, and thy invention; the thing
Answered my wish.

By this discourse of his
You may perceive love under that respect,
Like fire under its ashes; it is not lately,
Your charms have taken him.

In the mean time --


In the mean time, live all fair wits, say J;
Without me, you had been reduced unto
A sad condition, to die with grief,
And love, without expressing it.

It Is late;
Come, in the absence of the day let us prove,
If sleep will follow on the steps of love.

HOw! in the night, perfidious, to exasperate
My anger, dare thou to grant private meetings
To any but my self? yea in the night
Without light and attendance in the Garden,
Thou entertain'dst the Shepherd Clidamant.

How Is this! Thimantes in a rage, O Gods!
Who would have thought it?

Will thou say that J
Complain now without reason, that J have
A cracked brain, and bleer'd eyes? it is too long,
Inconstant, to arrest thy spirits, behold
This witness, it has told me every thing;
Yet J should not believe that thou were guilty,
If such an evidence accused thee not,
But since J dis-ingage my faith to thee,
This very instant, J restore thy papers
And will have nothing more to do with thee.

Well, let it be so then, J doubt it not,
But J shall be provided in good time;
When one forsakes me, presently another
Offers his service, otherwise J should,
In this unlucky moment of thy change,
Be destitute of an officious Lover;
But thanks unto the Gods, more then one calls me
His Mistress, and J shall have no less courtship
And press for thy departure, these notes here
Express the names of those that I Have subjected,
I Will blot thee presently out of my Table Book.

Light Shepheardess!


For all this J am troubled
For thy disquiet, without further jesting,
Know that this trouble which possesses thee
Proceeds but from a fiction, speedily
I Will clear it to thee, only have but patience
To stay here till the Shepherd Clidamant
Arrives, before whom I have order to
Discover the deceit; and then I know
Thou will excuse me for it. -- here he comes.

HAve J not staid too long? suspect me not,
Thimantes, J was sent for: well what is
Your pleasure?

Thy misfortune is extreme
Thimantes cannot suffer that another
Should love me, and one that account intends
To measure with thee sword and arm to day.

He is my friend, and therefore J am loath
To have a quarrel with him; to accord it,
Choose of us two him whom thou think most faithful.
I am content to stand unto my fortune,

Thimantes, what say you?


J agree to 't.


Then thus; for him, J do confess I love him
A little, but for thee, -- nothing at all.
My mouth interprets truly what my heart thinks

O the most fickle and most want on issue
Of the inconstant sex! thou love a momen,
J love a moment also.

Notwithstanding
J have a secret to impart unto thee.

A Secret in thy heart loses its name
In less time then a minute, without doubt:

Thou thought last night, that I discoursed with thee
At the Echo of the Garden?

Yes,


But what
If thou were then deceived, and that another
In my place counterfeited there my voice?

What have thou told me?


That which may be true.


J cannot comprehend it, nor find thee;
Thou do do nothing but deceive at all times,
And in all places; thou can turn thy heart
And eyes into all senses; how! another
Possess my place?

What if by this advise
J gained thee the heart of a fair Mistress,
One that 's illustrious, and of noble blood,
And who after the Nymph has the chief rank!

Well feign thy fill, thou may speak what thou list;
I Am henceforth in no humor but to laugh.

If by the greatest oaths wherein my honor
Can be engaged, thou will believe the truth
Of what J told thee, that another person
Beside my self received thy vows last night
J hope thou will find out some fitter Epithies
Then false and wavering for me.

After such
An obligation, my charity
Would sway me much.

Then solemnly J swear,
It was Parthenia in my place, to whom
Thou did express thy love; she borrowed
My name and shape, and thine eyes suffered
This sweet imposture.

Still thou do abuse me,
J knew thee by thy voice.

When we spoke loud,
'T was I that spoke; then presently Parthenia
Advancing in my place discovered softly
Her soul and thought unto thee: after this,
Judge, if I have deserved from thee, or no.

How! is it possible that she, to whose
High rank, I should not dare to aspire unto
So much as in a thought, that she to whom
I durst not speak a word in way of plaint,
That she, to whom my high respect concealed
My amity, should yet feel pity for me?
Alas! this cannot be, it is sin to think it.

Thou shall see if I lie, and how sh' esteems thee;
I wait her here.

Therein I should obtain
The hight of my ambition; for this favor,
Oh let me kiss thy hands and die with pleasure.

WHat spectacle is this? I see Ismenia
Sports with my fortune, if I trouble you,
I will retire, continue that rare favor;
Who freely gives the hands, may give the heart.

Ha! Madam, really you are a novice
In love; I gave him intimation of
The arri fice we used, and he at first
Received my discourse with so much joy,
That he craved from me that civility.
Unto what jealous strange suspicions
Are you drawn by this object! he but aimed
To kiss my hand, and you are like to die for it?
Trouble you self no more thus to no purpose.

Ismenia thou restor'st me life, and rest,
I love thee, Clidamant; this jealous fit,
Methinks, might well have spared me the shame
Of telling it.

Fair Nymph, believe --


But let us
Enter into this Wood.

I wish the Echo,
Sometimes a friend to Lovers, would redouble
My voice in saying to you that J love,
And make you to repeat my words, J love.

Ismenia, be a faithful witness of
Our chaste amors, and come along with us
To hear what we discourse, Thimantes be
Discreet and secret.

Madam, I Am all silence.
See, what a strange unnecessary evil
Is that a jealous person does sustain;
Foolish Melintus how thou art deceived
In thinking that Diana is the object
Gf Clidamant's affection -- here she comes
Discoursing with her brother, J will leave them.

LEt us consider what we are to do,
She loves thee infinitely, and J have
Command from her to speak to thee again,
In her behalf.

Advise me what to do.


Since the Nymph loves thee with such passion,
As I perceive she does, it is ft thou flatter
Her grief a little, otherwise I fear
That I shall lose thee after having found thee.
What mischief can she not do, when provoked?

Since there needs but to feign all will succeed.


In the mean time, Ismenia will be careful
To inquire for us, when the Merchant-ship
That Is bound for Sevill will be fully ready
To set sail from the harbor; we shall hire him
To land us where we will; till when, our care
Must be not to offend the Nymph, for fear
She ruin us; she will presently be here.
She Is come already; act the Lover well,
Dissemble handsomely, therein consists
All that we can expect.

A Word, Diana.
Have thou removed that fatal obstacle,
Which came to intetrupt the pleasant course
Of my affections? have thou settled
My life's content, and razed Celia
Out of thy Brothers spirit?

His heart follows
Where my voice and his glory calls him,
And cheerfully yields obedience
To such sweet Laws.

Blessed Interpreter
Of a most ardent love! have thou advised him
To keep it secret?

Only that point, Madam,
J have forgotten, but J will redeem it;
And tell him on it before you; if you please
That I go for him.

Go, and bring him hither.

Feign handsomely unto her

Fear it not.
I Will speak before her but of you, and to you,
And yet not make her jealous.

Could you doubt
My heart should be so stupid, and insensible
Of my felicity how happy is
My fortune, and how gentle was the storm
That gave me this blessed port, whereof great Kings
Are jealous? What proud Conqueror would not
Submit and lay his arms down with himself
At the fair feet of such a charming object?
A rude obdurate rock, would be consumed,
The coldest Marble would be kindled by it:
Yes, Madam, a fair eye but opens
Its lid here, and it is day; the nights black shadows
Fly only from the Sun of those bright eyes,
Her fires too at the sight of them grow pale.
I must confess then, Madam, that J love them,
And that J live more in this beauteous object
Then in my self: my spirit is charmed with
A happiness unparalleled, when J
Think that J love them, and am loved again.

Come, thou but feignest love? do not abuse me.


O Gods! what do you say? Madam, J love
Or rather J adore.

How have thou then
Disposed of Celia that reigned o'r thy heart?

That affair's ordered well, I Have put her interests
Into my Sisters hands; sh' 'ath promised me
To make all fair of that side, and will answer
To me for her.

Have thou not boasted to me
That her eyes were the object of thy love?
That for thy sake she cherished the light
Of the alternate day, and that they would
Cover themselves with an eternal night,
If thou should cease to live or to be faithful:
Think well of thy part what thou have promised;
Be firm, be constant, fail not in that point,
Consider not at all this supreme greatness;
Stick to thine object, love it for it self,
And have no interest for thy ambition,
Flatter thee with the honor to possess her,
Look only if she loves thee, not if she
Enricheth thee; the beauty whom thou serv'st,
Should be thy crown, all greatness whatsoever
Should be esteemed in thy account beneath it.

Never doubt it, Madam, J shall have those thoughts;
Greatness shall never blind me so far forth
As to oblige me to forget my love;
Which always shall pure as the day star burn
Base interest shall never sully me.

I Will tell my Brother now, what I forgate


If thou know well to love, know thou as well
To hold thy peace, love like the other Gods,
Is not without his secrets, he is served
Sometimes by hearts that cannot express themselves:
Take heed how thou provoke his jealous power,
Adore his Altars, but adore in silence;
For silence is a part of his Religion;
And oftentimes this fierce God is offended
At his own name; if any thing hereof
Should be known in the Isle, thou art undone:
Love, without speaking of it, that is the law,
Which is imposed on thee; she for her part
Will love thee likewise, use the secret well,
Melissa otherwise would die with grief;
J know the excess of love wherewith thy soul
Is filled; but for thy own interest,
Put a seal on thy mouth.

Yes, have a care
That none suspect our love, I Will take my time
To publish it, in the mean time I Will study
Thy setrlement and they repose which makes
That of my life; this free confession now,
Would call up envy from her Cell, and make
Our greatest Hero's, to dispute with thee
What J have promised thee, thine enemies.
Judge then how precious thy obedience is;
Since all thy good and happiness depends
Upon thy silence.

Sure, J should be stricken
With a strange blindness, if J observed not
This your command; J will obey so well,
That, Madam, even you your self shall doubt
Whether J love, or whether you J love.

In the mean time thy sister shall assist me,
And have the ordering of our Amors;
Believe what she shall say, since I will make her
My only bosom friend, unto whose trust,
J will commit the secrets of my heart.

J will make use of her in the same manner.

Madam, a Jeweller, that uses still.
To come unto the Games, desires access
Unto your presence.

Cause him to come in:
This Sevil Merchant comes every year
To sell and traffic in the Island with us.

SHall you remain sometime yet on our shore?


I stay but for your Passport to depart.
Every year, Madam, by your Highness bounty
My trassick thrives so well, that whatsoever
Commodities I bring unto you Isle,
J carry nothing back, you empty still
My casket: now I Will show you, if you please,
such rarities, as can be had no where
But in my hands.

Let Us see them.


Here Is a Diamond
Darts flame of all sides.

It Is a sparkling stone
I like his luster.

Will you have it, Madam?


I Will tell you presently, show all at once,
Then I shall soon choose: let me see that Coral.

The piece is very fair; till now your Isle
Has never seen the like.

And what is that other?


A piece of Ambergris; Madam, it is rare
And of great price; I have passed diverse Seas
To purchase it; alone it is worth as much
As all my casket.

For my part, J cannot
See any thing that is new here.

Shepheardess,
This rope of Pearl is very rich and new,
'T would make you look more fair, more gay, more sparkling.

Without those Ornaments of Art, she is
Charming enough, she needs no strange additions.
She makes all our Shepherds die for love:
But for all this, though you are fair without them
I will bestow them on you, if you like them.
What says Diana.

Madam, your great bounties --


Lay them aside.


But, Madam, look upon
This Masterpiece of Art, it is the Portrait
In little of the King of Andalousia.

He Is one of the best made that I have seen.
And who is this?

It is his favorite
Nearchus sometime Prince of Pichery,
Who by a beauty fatal through her charms,
Gave up his arms, and life unto his Rival,
A gallant Gentleman, his name Cleagenor,

May I believe! good Gods! how he observes me?
But are you certain of Nearchus death?

He returned sorely wounded from the fight,
And died four days after, as all know.

His valor seems yet painted in his face.


But he that conquered him had more by much.
Behold his Portrait.

Oh! what shows he?


Is this that valiiant Cleagenor?


Yes, it is his picture.


O unlucky accident!


Of all those that J had, this only 's left me:
The offended King commanded me to carry them
Unto all places where J went, and traffick'd,
That so he might be known, and then arrested;
For after this great Combat, to secure
His head from pursuit, he took flight immediately.

Thersander, in my judgment, nothing can
Better resemble you, J think your sister
Will say as much.

Madam, we see that Nature
Sports sometimes in her works, and makes some feitures
In faces to resemble somewhat nearly.

This Merchant,, I believe, 's of my opinion.


Madam, without doubt, it is Cleagenor,


The thing is little certain on the faith
And bare ground of a Portrait.

Sir, you are
The very same, I am confirmed now
In my first thoughts, all that which hitherto
Hindered me to judge so, was the name of
Thersander, and the habit of a Shepherd.

Who! J, Cleagenor?


Yes, Sir, J saw you
The last year in the fortunate Islands, and
Not above four months since in Portugal;
Sevll's your native Country; since you meet here
Your safety, to what purpose should you cover
Those things with silence?

Sure, you need not blush,
Thersander, at this fair acknowledgement.

I confess, Madam, that J blush a little,
Not that mine arm has not done all that which
It ought to do in the death of my Rival,
Nearchus was too rash, and insolent;
From the fair and unspotted object which
Made my most chaste desires, he in his thoughts
Formed the object of his filthy pleasures;
But he has paid for it, and his death is just
Only the thing that troubles and afflicts me,
And for which I am sorry at my heart,
Is that J told you nothing of my secret.

J guess the cause of it, and know your thought.
And what fear troubled it, and that you chose
Another name only to free you from
The penalty of the Law; but fear not any thing;
I Will oppose power to power for your defense;
Your interests are mine, J'l make your peace;
The King of Andalousia shall be weary
Of persecuting you; if he persift
To trouble your repose, J'l invade his:
If he refuse to grant what we demand,
From our request we will proceed to arms.

What obligation have you upon me
For all your goodness?

But let us make an end
Of seeing all the rarities.

Behold
With admiration, Madam, this rare piece,
It is Diana's Picture.

How Dianaes?


O sad misfotrune!


It is the Divinity,
Whose Temple's here, the Goddess of this place.

I cease to tremble, all is well again.


What Portrait's this?


It is a Beauties, Madam,
Whose heavenly graces made two desperate Lovers,
That sight for her, arm for the field, and fight;
It is that fair ones whom I told you of
For Whom Cleagenor and Nearchus burned,
And who pursued hotly by two Rivals,
Coft the one flight, and life unto the other.
After Nearchus death, I bought his Portraits:
This that he had without doubt's to the life.
But who can better then Cleagenor
Instruct you in this point?

D' ye know this piece?


I know not what to say on it.


I observe
Much of thy sisters air in it.

O ye Gods!
Turn aside this misfortune.

Really
The glass, Diana, which receives thy image,
Represents less thy shape and countenance;
And any other but the Painter would
Believe indeed that the finished this Portrait
Upon thy presence.

There Is no doubt of it.
One may admire in this adventure how
Art imitateth nature: it is she
For whom Nearchus sighed.

O Gods! where are we?
Our fortunes now are desperate.

Know thou me?


I am of the same Town, and therefore know you;
Your mother is Melora, and she dwells
At Sevil; I shall make her a glad woman
At my return, to tell her that her Celia
Lives yet, and is in health here in this Island.

How! Celia?


Yes, Madam, that is her name,


What could of error blinds thy soul thus?
That Celia whom thou mean, and do discourse of,
Died before Nearchus.

It was believed so
At first; but since, all Sevil knows the contrary,
And that false death is now no more a mystery
Unto me; J know where the mourning went,
And how a Coffin only was interred
Instead of you, that this apparent sign
Of your death only could secure you from
Nearchus ill designs; I know besides
That you betook your self unto the Sea,
Where you sight not, but for Cleagenor;
The Sea proved false to you, and to your mother,
And separated you one from another
By the assistance of a hideous storm:
She having saved her self upon a plank
Sought you from one end of the World to the other;
But hearing no news of you, she believed
At her return to Sevil that the Sea
Had swallowed you, and death had made her search
Unprofitable.

Thou know secrets which
To me are Riddles.

Wherefore should you, Lady,
Dissemble thus your knowledge of a thing
Which is no more concealed; one of your people
A complice of the Plot, divulged it lately;
Melora too since her return revealed
The whole Imposture, all impediment
Being removed after Nearchus death:
This that I know, I understood from her.

All this thou say, is strange news unto us.


You have the art, I see, well to dissemble;
But by your favor might it not be you
That did employ a friend unto me lately
To pray me to receive into my bark
Two Shepherds, natives of the Town of Sevil?

Madam, this Merchant does compose Romants.
And tells you all these strange adventures only,
To show his wit, and faculty that way.

Yet his discourse in not without some ground,
I find good reason so to judge of it;
If I remember well, you willingly
Did put the interest of Celia
Into your sisters hands, she promised
To make all fair of that side, and to answer
To you for her: Merchant, another time
See us again. How both of you abuse me
With an Imposture formed under false name's
To carry on your love in a disguise!
What in my Palace, in my Court, my presence,
Sport with my person thus in a contempt!
Insolent wretches, you shall feel what force
My anger has when thus provoked, I Will make you --

Oh, Madam!


Go, Impostor, thou shall answer
For all the troubles of my heart; none ever
Affro ntd me yet without punishment:
I Will sacrifice you both to my disgrace,
In such a manner, that ye shall repent
Eternally that ever ye made me blush:
Depart my sight.

O what misfortune's this!


See that you separate them one from another
In several apartment, that they may
Hold no discourse together. O misfortune
Not to be paralleled! What shall I do?
Of whom should I take counsel in this case?
Shall I hear yet my love that murmureth?
Ought I to suffer, or repel the injury?
It is resolved in my offended heart
That those black Passions shall succeed my love,
By which the soul when in disorder, breaks
The chain wherewith she is ti'd, break forth my fury,
And ruin these ungrateful they shall know
My power, as they have seen my goodness to the:
They shall not mock at my simplicity,
Nor reproach me for my credulity:
How! treacherous Thersander; oh! that name
Thersander combats yet within my heart,
In its defense, my spirits at this name
Are wavering, and my anger's weak, my hate
Is in suspense; I am not pleased with that
Which I demand; I fear what J would most.
Ha traitor, must J to torment my self
Suspend my judgment upon thy destruction?
Must J dispute the case within myself
As doubtful to determine, no pass sentence
Against him for this barbarous affront:
Arm my despair, and inspire thou my rage:
And let me see how faithfully my Art
Will serve my vengeance in the punishment
Of these ungrateful Lovers, I intend not
To give a sudden death to either of them,
But they shall suffer that which shall be worse:
By the effect, and strange force of my charms,
They shall have, without dying, every day
A thousand deaths; I will continually
By turns afflict the sad eyes of the Lover,
And of his Mistress: both of them shall see,
That they may suffer equally, each other
To die and to revive, this punishment
Is strange and cruel; but it is that I use
In my revenges; come, why loiter we
In our design? my heart like flint shall be
Insensible of their calamity.

MIne eyes and ears never saw, nor heard the like
The miserable cries of those poor Lovers
Fill all these places with astonishment.
Thersander and Diana are so changed,
I could scarce know them, as I now came from them:
Pale death by turns skipping from face to face,
Cannot make them yet to dye unto their love:
But, Madam, is it true what is published here
Among the people, that those strange enchantments
Come from Melissa?

Yes, they are the works
Of her Art, without doubt, she could do more yet
Nothing's too hard for her, the destiny
Of mortals seems to be held in her hands,
And as she pleases, she disposes it.
What can she not do, when she is in choler?
The miserable Thirsis feels the effect,
And rigor of her power by sad experience.
Has not same yet informed you with his sufferings?

Yes, Madam, J have heard them fully spoken.


You know then that he loved Roselia,
And so deceived the expectation,
And desire of the Nymph who hitherto
Designed him for my husband, and knows not
That I have love for you; to her commands
This Shepherd was Rebellious: what did she?
Roselia was fair, she became sick;
She wept, she pined, she complained; the brightness
Of her fair eyes, extinguished in a moment:
The whiteness of her Lillies as soon faded;
And of so many beauties there remained
Only the place, where sometime their seat was,
Her Lover that perceived her taken from him,
Seeks her in every place, but cannot find her:
That was a Masterpiece of her Apprentiship;
But this without doubt is another work
Of higer knowledge; if in her resentment
But for my interest she made poor Thirsis
A miserable Lover, judge how far
She may be carried, moved at her offense,
In her revenge for her own interest.

If the Nymph knew the love I have for you,
I could expect no other usage from her;
She would without doubt cause me to be carried
unto some fearful Island where I should
Be rendered miserable all my days:
But let her art do what it can against me
Employed by her hate, it shall work nothing
Upon my faith, to do it prejudice:
Oh! could I flatter me with the same hope,
That you would have like constancy for me!

You need not doubt of it, I Am wholly yours,
My love is strong, and little fears her anger;
I Will keep it still sincere and firm unto you:
And you shall find me constant unto death:
Should she destroy me with her power, and kill me
I Will rather dye my self, then my affection.
My life cannot pay the debt J owe unto you.

WHat strange news do we hear? is it true, Madam,
That by the effects of fortune and enchantment,
Thesander and Diana dye by turns,
And live again to wail their miseries?

Ismenia, it is too true, they are enchanted.


If I durst speak my thoughts, and what I Have heard,
They impute this injuftice to the Nymph.

It is not to be doubted but she is
The Author of it, and this cruel punishment
Denotes that she studies high revenge,
When she is offended.

Whatso'er her power be
Which causes fear, let us go presently
With our complaint unto her: in my judgment,
This is no way to make her self obeyed:
Fear is the parent not of love, but hate.
And that same fatal art which her revenge
Calls to her aid, establishes her crime,
And not her power. But here J see she comes.

WHat does this stroke surprise thee?


Truly, Madam,
Their punishment's too great, and all the Jsfland
Murmureth at it.

Shepherds, what say you?
Can J revenge me of an injury?

Ye, Madam, and the estate wherein you have put them
Has made all those their friends that envied them.
Hear our petitions for them, and be pleased
To do them justice: what have they committed
Worthy of such a punishment? for having
Hid their love from you, lived in your Court
Under the name of brother, and of sister,
Deceived the hope and envy of their Rivals,
Conserved their honor, and, perhaps, their life,
^s this so great a crime, as should be punished
By charms which have no end? must they be made
To dye, and to revive continually
By turns, and by a strange unworthy fate
The living be enforced successively
Still to lament the dead? their pittious cries,
And hideous clamours give both souls and mouths
Unto those rocks to join in plaints with me:
The whole Isle's moved with them, and disturbed

Madam, I join in this petition,
Vouchsafe to hear me: O forbear to dart
Thunder and wrath upon this happy place,
Where the Gods liberally pour upon mortals
So many and so great felicities:
Begin not to disturb the sweet repose
Of an abode that is favored by Heaven,
To please those Shepherds, whose devotions
May fix upon some other Sanctuary
More safe, and other Sovereigns more sweet.

Yes, Madam, stop the mouth of this sad murmur,
Let it be smothered, this enchantment has
Continued too long, break, break the charm,
And pacify our spirits immediately,
Which are astonished at this proceeding.

If in the freedom which J use too frequently,
My mouth might date to speak, and not diplease you,
I should then tell you that this rigid course
You take, would leave you here ner Shepheardesses
Nor Shepherds; they would seek this place no more
For their retrait and sanctuary, but shun it
Like a destroying rock; and this fair Island
The glory of the world, would be a wilderness:
To enjoy subjects, rule your passions better,
^^d be more sovereign over your self.

Shepherds, and Shepheardesses, your discourses
Astonish and surprise me, know, my Art,
Is a sufficient warrant for my actions;
J could do greater yet, and stranger too:
Though this which you have seen seems unjust
Unto you, have you any right, or privilege
To complain to me, and to murmur thus?
Much less to reprehend, and censure me?
How! should the bold Shepherd Thersander dare
To injure me, and to deride my power?
Should he presume to lay aside his duty
And respect for me, and I wink at it,
That so can punish such an insolence?
Presume it not, the blood of Zoroastres
Is not yet born under so ill a star,
J know its influence better, and can use it
To the destruction of those that wrong me:
Yes, Shepherds, I am skilful in the qualities
Of herbs and roots, and as I have occasion
J choose them, some for poison, some for medicine:
When I will, I prescribed some to confound
The memory, and to distract the spirit;
But those obnoxious weeds I never use
But for their punishment that do offend me;
Have I not reason to maintain my rank
In dignity and honor? those that dare
To brave me, without doubt, hazard themselves:
My scepter's guarded with enwreathed serpents,
Whose fearful aspects bid all keep aloof,
And threaten death to those that dare to touch it:
Thirsis has felt their stings: what reason had he
To be an enemy to his own fortune
And interest, in foolishly refusing
The honor of the name to be my Nephew:
I will advance him, and expect that he
Shall yet accept this honorable title
Of Husband to my Niece; Parthenia,
Your color changes, but in vain you hide
Your thoughts from me, I can discover them,
I know that you love Clidamant, and more
What you design, and what you do discourse;
But understand both one and the other of you,
That I must be obeyed in what I will;
My power can force it; take heed ye provoke not
My anger; if J may not be beloved,
J will be feared.

Madam --


It is enough,
You know my prohibition.

I hope
To bend her, but at present let us say nothing.

We all know your high rank and quality
With reverence and respect, so in that notion
We employ but our prayers to persuade you;
They are our only arms, be touched with them,
And dissipate these charms: Thersander, now
Begins t'awake out of his fatal fit;
You Will hear his plaints and clamours presently,
His cries and his despair for his dear Mistress
This is the hour, wherein he is tormented:
This object without doubt before your eyes
Will raise up pity, Madam, in your heart:
His sighs will quench your anger, and prevail
Much more then we; see he begins to move:
Madam, you will be touched, to hear him speak.

O Lamentable object! why mine eyes
Were ye not covered with eternal darkness,
That J might not have seen this fatal spectacle?
Oh! what cause have I to complain of fortune,
That my sleep is not the last sleep of death?
In the night of the Grave I should take rest,
And not be tied to die thus all my life,
I should be there but dust, and this sad sight
Should not have martyred my heart and eyes.
Yes, my dear Mistress, sometime my delight,
Thy sight is now my greatest punishment,
And in this sad estate wherein I see thee,
Thou which were once my joy, art now my grief;
Thy body's but a trunk that gives me horror,
Thy head all over's smoking with thy blood,
The graces lodge no more there, I see death
In every place, where I saw love before:
How! do thou live no more then have I lost thee
As soon as found thee hopes born and destroyed
With an immortal love, fantosine of fortune
Which lasts good but a day, wealth too soon lost,
Brightness too soon put out, excessive joy,
To which so many plaints so soon succeed,
Why in that splendour where with all you slatter'd,
My name, did you promice so much unto me,
And give so little. Fair eyes, sometimes conquerous,
Whose lightsafe shut up in eternal night
In spite of all my prayers, call me not
From death unto the light; is it possible
That I can see here what Diana sees not
No, no, I live no more since she is dead;
Yet my heart moves; but this last struggling is
But a small spark that is left behind, and shines
A little after death; it is but a vapor,
An exaltation, a wind, a smoke,
Last dying and last kindled; I am coming
To join with thee, object of my desire,
To give thee soul for soul, and sigh for sigh;
Death is my aid, my hope is but in her;
I will express that I am faithful to thee
In that, not able to survive thy fate,
I put my self into the arms of death.

Madam, you see how great his torment is,
And whereunto your hatred has reduced him;
You see besides how far without proportion
Of the crime to the punishment, the power
Of your enchantment goes; these woods weep at it;
And these rocks which before heard no complaints,
Are pierced now with his cries, and become soft,
And sensible, the Echo likewise mourns,
And should you only, Madam, be without
Compassion for him.

Yes, without compassion;
Since he took pleasure always to displease me,
I Will please my self by a most just return
Jn my revenge, and never cease t'afflict him:
No, think not that J will incline to pity.
I Am too much injured to be pacified
His sorrow makes my joy, and I am glad
To see that by this famous punishment
I shall establish my authority.

Diana's turn is now; see he revives
To weep her lover, and immediately
To follow him by the force of your Art:
Sad spectacle? hearken unto her grief,
And open your eyes, and heart to her complaints,

What, my dear Lover, art thou then but dust!
Alas! thy mouth wants speech, and thine eyes light.
But inspight of the plot which makes me sigh,
I have the happiness yet to lament thee:
Flow, flow, my tears, and pour upon this object
Torrents of flame, not water, there is nothing
So cold in the dark bosom of the Grave,
Which the fire of these Rivers cannot warm:
Yes, by my tears at last, my cries, my plaints,
Dear ashes, I will kindle you again,
Though cold now and extinguished like the Phoenix
I Will raise you up again by force of sights,
Which you shall Echo to me.

Madam can you
Behold this sight, and not be moved at it!

Love, can thou not answer to my desires!
Thou art a miracle thy self, and therefore,
Methinks, should do one: art thou in the world
No more a source of life? oh can thou not
Restore my lover to me, from whose arms
They 'ave ravished him; which of the Gods can call him
Back from the gates of death, if thou can not?
My dear Cleagenor, J pray thee, answer me
By these my tender sighs, by Celia's name;
How Is this! I can pronounce thy name, and mine
And yet, O Gods! thou answerest me nothing;
I see, alas! thy mouth and eyes still shut:
He Is dead, and these names cannot touch him now.
Love, since thou have no power to succor me
In that point as to make him live, at least
Make me to dye: I come, my faithful lover,
It is impossible I should survive thee;
I feel that my despair to enjoy thee here
Gives me to death; my heart has lost the spirits
Which made it move, J scarce can utter more:
Happy thy Celia, if her death could give
Thee life again, if thy sleep might have end
By mine, and if I could with all my blood
Redeem thine; J have done, any love is coming
To meet thy flame, and I espire upon thee
The rest of my sad soul.

What! is your heart
Not touched yet with this object? are you still
Jnsensible of so much grief as she
Suffers by your means? oh! let pity yet
Disarm your anger, the Enchanted Lovers
Have suffered enough Nymph, break the charm.

Yes, I am touched at last, J must confess,
And really am sorry for the evil
Which they have drawn through their temerity
Upon themselves; but though their grief appeaseth
My anger now, the charm which I have made
J cannot undo; to tell you truly, Shepherds,
It is so strong that only a Divinity
Can break the chance on it; it is decreed by fate
That it shall last yet longer, and J cannot
Prevent it, though it be my proper work.

How! cannot you prevent it? heavenly Gods,
What saying's this? no, no, you have not left
Your anger, but retain it still; and willing
To punish them, and to revenge your wrong,
Will make of them a lasting spectacle
Unto the eyes of all; and to excuse
Your self the better of this cruelty,
Would put it off to some Divinity;
But the Gods by our prayers and tears appeased,
Jnspight of your attempts, will stop your charms:
Yes, Madam, the great Gods condemn your plots,
They are the Sovereigns, and absolute Masters
Of destiny, we hope all things from them,
And that they will suffer crime no longer here
To reign and tyranize. Thou Goddess, which
Art in this place adored which hold fate,
And fortune in thy hands, which hate crime,
and whose cares keep the Shepherds that serve thee
In this delightful Island, look upon
The sad estate whereto love hat reduced
Two miserable Lovers, whom the Nymph
Pursues with horrid cruelty to death
By fatal charms, destroy the power of them,
And render to this government again
The liberty to lover, and to declare it.

Ha! what a sudden flash of lightning's this,
That strikes mine eyes, and what a clap of thunder
Shakes all this place?

With what a thick black cloud
The Sky is covered?

I believe Heaven trembles,
And its Arch opens; behold the Goddess
Descends, and makes sign, as if she would speak:
We must give audience.

YOur prayers are heard, let nothing trouble you,
Fair Celia and her Lover both shall live
And love for ever, their afflictions
Are ended, and I have dissolved the charm,
No accident shall henceforth trouble them.
They stirred up pity in you, now they may
Make you to envy them; search all Records,
You Will find no subject equal to their love.

By what enchantment is thy life restord?


By what enchantment do'ft thou live again?
I Will recompense their inexemplar virtues,
And pay the price of their affection;
To consummate their happy Nuptials,
I Will open my Temple, and assure you all
Of my protection. It Is my pleasure also
That the love of the Shepherd Clidamant
Be at the same time crowned with Hymen's honors,
And that he end his days with sweet Parthenia,
That henceforth he command in the Isle with her;
My justice has made choice of them to reign.
The Nymph I do degrade, she is too criminal,
And dispense you of your obedience to her;
I Will make the power of her Art unusefull;
And free this Island from all future fear,
And danger; but to save her from the Thunder
Of the offended Gods, I will recive her
Into my Temple, which shall be her Sanctuary.
Her Sex has long enough ruled the Province,
I Will change the order of its Government,
And henceforth it shall be under the power,
And wise administration of a Prince,
Which shall be of the blood of Clidamant
From father unto son.

I confess Goddess,
You do me justice in approving crime
One makes himself a complice: without you,
The Gods, high Sovereigns, Masters, and disposers
Of destiny, would, sure, have punished me
With death; I go into your temple now
To employ other charms, to wash away
My criminal defilements with my tears
To pray unto the immortal powers, whilst J
Have breath, and so disarm them at your Altars:
But to the end her law may be fullfill'd
In every point, Cleagener, fail not
To love your Celia.

O how redevable
Am I to your rare goodness?

Clidamant,
Enjoy what you deserve, accept Parthenia,
With her, the crown, and succeed happily
The rank which I freely resign unto you.

You command still, and keep your Sovereign rank,
When the reign is conferred upon your blood;
And by all my respects, I shall express
That it is but in your name that I Will be Master.

Though Heavens kind hand chooses a husband for me,
Since you allow him, I Will hold him of you,
And will possess no honor here, nor power,
But to express the more my service to you,
And my acknowledgements.

Ismenia,
Must we not couple too?

Yes, if the Goddess
Had said it; we will defer our marriage,
Till she descends again.

Ismenia,
I command in this place now, and J will it.

Since you will have it, I accept his vows
Offaithfull service. If Melintus too
Has shaken of his jealousy, J must
Be reconciled with him.

Well, J agree to 't.
Let us remain friends.

Heaven has promised us.
That we shall all be happy, let us go
Forthwith unto the Temple to conclude
This triple marriage, and henceforth we shall
Honor this day as a great Festival.


