I That have lasht base Traitors to the bone,
Have whipped ambition, pride, and spared none;
Played the Man-Midwifes part, and with my pen
Have dig'd the eyes out of rebellions men:
And with my keen-edg'd Muse (gone through stitch)
Squeezed out the bowels o'th Genevah Witch;
Have proved the monstrous children of the State
Ignobly born, and illegitimate,
Now fly, and higher pitch; and on the Stage
Present to view the Monsters of the Age,
These sons of Belial, you must only read;
And yet this Play was acted once indeed:
Whether I fall or rise, thus I conclude,
I shall be famed above the multitude.

WOe is me, where shall I seek for safety? the murmuring Drums, and brazen
Trumpets deaf my ears, nothing is heard but shreikes of murdered men, Bellona
rides in triumph ore dead men, her horses wash their feet in humane blood,
rebellious hands are every where employed to root out Loyalty: hark, me
thinks I see them grapple hand to hand, and are now in the field

Where Lightning raises it self to the Skies,
The earth shines round with Armor, sounds do rise
By men forced under feet: wounded with noise
The hills to heaven reverberate their voice.
Into what nook or angle shall I fly to gain a little respite? Cursed be the
traitors that cry out, no Peace, let Sampsons tailed messengers bear hence
these fatal Firebrarnds to some other soil, or let them make their way to
their own houses, there consume, devast their houses, and their granaries; let
all their sons run mad, and trace the streets like frantic Bacchanalls, and
while they there seek for refuge, be cut of by the all devouring sword. Let
them be slaves and labor at the mill, and let their wives and daughters beg,
let them be ravished first, then slain; Let baseness be intaild upon their
name, too firm for all recovery: these are the Devils that do grin at Heaven,
and jeer all Laws, both Moral and Divine. The red, and white Rose strove for
Sovereignty, but these contest to set up Anarchy, confusion, and the worst of
ills that Envy can imagine; thunder, great Jove, upon these traitors heads,
that like cursed Lucifer, and his rebel troops, dare bid defiance to thy face

While I into some hollow cave do run,
And curse the hell hounds that this war begun.

Stand.


Give the word there.


Stand.


Thus far we are victorious my Cohorts, crown we our heads now with triumphant
Bays, for England now is ours: Courageous Rupert, Hopton, Glemham and the
rest, we have brought to the ground; we have not left a loyal Dog alive; all is
ours, all is ours: those fools that say I am apostated from my first
principles, know not what honor means, or what it is to be great

I Will sell my King, my Country and my soul,
To be one of those rule without control.

And would the Sophies of the State not tremble? were but our breasts
transparent, they might view their pictures stabbed with ponyards, and each
killing a Member in his heart: Can they imagine those that have rebelled
against their Sovereign for ambitious ends will yield them homage: no, they
were the stone that pasht K. Charles to pieces, and with the same we will grind
them unto powder. Me thinks I see them tottering on their seats, now that our
hands are shrunk from their supportance: sink till you see hells bottom, while
we rise high in honors compassed with pleasures. Who'd care to see the world
burn round about him


Which to effect, 'twere best we strengthened our design by entering into
solemn covenant: here is Catalines Effigy; if you intend to prosecute your
wishes through blood and vengeance, and to reach your glories maugre the fury
of the world, swear by this sacred Relic


Most religiously.


By the famed memory of this brave spirit, that once made Rome to tremble at
his nod, who took the horrid Sacrament in blood to level her proud
battlements, swear not to lay down arms till King Charles be sent to the
invisible land, till all Laws are repealed and abrogated, meum and tuum on
pain of death not mentioned


We swear.


So; now we may be open to each other, now Charles his Crown shall be ours,
and we will share it: to attain which 'twere best to stir the people, those
ravenous Kites will flock to any prey; we must make them our stilts on which we
walk, and burn them in the end to warm us: we must propose them more
immunities, tell them they hitherto have been abused basely by Kings, but worse
by their Trustees: a Declaration shall be framed forthwith, inciting them at
once to join with us for ENGLANDS FREEDOM, and the SOLDIERS RIGHTS


The plot is laid as I would wish, this to effect, we will depose our General,
he is not mad enough to be our Guide, we can create a new one with a word;
John, Legislative John shall be our Captain. And 'cause he famous John of
Leydon imitates, we henceforth will him John of London call: but this we must
not yet divulge, but let the choke pear hang till it be rip^r: he that does
fish for the rude multitude, must cast forth golden nets, some rare unwonted
liberty, which we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and
resolved to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, against all
oppositions whatsoever, being compelled thereto, not only by the example of our
Ancestors, whose blood was often spent in vain, for the recovery of their
freedoms, suffering themselves through fraudulent accomodations to be deluded
of their victories, but also by our own woeful experience; who having long
expected, and deeply earned the establishment of those certain rules of
government which we propound, and yet are made to depend for their settlement
and freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruel war upon
us


You mean the King, whom we will now call to account, we cannot be secure
while he does live


Of that we will debate when we next meet in Counsel, in the mean time, give
it out, that we intend to give the people freedom, to Level the enclosures of
Nobilty, Gentry and property, and make all even: now let the Genius that did
wait upon grim Spartacus, desperate Cethegus, and fell Cutaline, prompt us to
action, and till we have set up our Oligarchie, no peace to England


No peace.


Let Regicide and Patricide be sent for: from their two heads we will distill a
juice stronger then Stibium, banefuller then Hemlock


It Is then concluded that K. Charles must die, His blood dissolves the English
Monarchy


Let Us in to counsel; for I long to see The first Scene acted of this Tragedy.


Infernal Firebrands, whom the very tears
Of groaning England, while she mourning wears,
Cannot allay: Nor yet the bleeding veins
Of desparate Ireland, which even now remains
A very Golgotha, cannot assuage,
Whole Babes, the earnest of another age,
Taste of your salvage courses, and do ly
The Lambe-like Martirs of their cruelty.
Let Catesby, Piercy, and that bloody knot
Be Sainted now, or else at least forgot,
And let these vipers vindicate their crimes,
In every Almanac for aftertimes.
O damned Projectors, whether will ye run,
Having usurped the Chariot of the Sun,
You drive amain till all about is hurld,
And your base folly fires our English world.
O England, do thou yet want eyes to see
How many Rogues are digging graves for thee?
Does not thy very heart consume with pain,
When thou considerest thy Sovereign
Even with chains unto the earth is held,
His sufferings being unparalleld?
See thou not his Religious constancy,
His patience, care, and zealous piety,
And can thou still give credit to these Elves,
Who suck thy blood for to make fat themselves?
These Hippocrites clothed with holy zeal
Are thy obnoxious Fates, destroy thy weal,
They are mere outsides, have an holy tone,
Yet, are but Devils masked every one:
Their insides full of murder, lust and pride,
Sacrilege, treason, and all ills beside.
For shame then sit not still until you be
Struck dead, and thrown to hells profunditie.

ANd are they still so foolish to implore his poor assistance, who is their
prisoner, their vassal, made so by the chance of war, a cake of ice, whom
with their breath they may dissolve to nothing


Yes, Commissioners (forsooth) are now employed to move him yet to sign the
PROPOSITIONS: Now by the happy Issue that I wish to all our Plots, I grieve to
see their vainness and supercillious folly; is it not in them for to degrade
him? does the bare empty name of King affright them? O I Am mad, stark mad with
rages -- it must be so, we will remove this block that so choakes up our
passage


Sic est in satis, how Lord-like shall we reign when he is removed; I that
have fared so well causing him troubles shall fare much better, having caused
his death; then I and thee will become the Archflamins of this Age, the
Metropollitans of our new Anarchy; nor wine nor women will we want, spending
whole days and nights in luxury, (the world knows PETER'S ever loved a whore)
therefore twill be no novell news to them: the pit pat Blacke-coats shall not
date to speak save what we shall prescribe, them that lived cor^ell, that once
durst affront me. yea, bang me back and side, for that I tasted of his wife
and mutton his mutton and his wife shall amply taste of sorrow


As little Love will I show unto LOVE my ancient antagonist, who thwarted me
even in the Temple before our Senators, bidding defiance to my utmost Acts: O
the brave times that we may enjoy, Saturns golden Age was a mere hell to what
we shall enjoy! O the sweet discourtes, on Capon and Cock (...), the halcion
days that we are now in hope of make us to vaunt too loud -- but what is the
news abroad? how does it fare with the mixed multitude, I mean the ARMY, how
do the Linsey Woolsey men at Westminster, that medly of decrepid age and youth
agree in their desires


I Will for the Kingdom, but most well for us, the Army have already purged out
all that are not of their Faction; the Adjutators of five Regiments, Apostasy,
Conspiracy, Treachery and Impiety have broke the ^ce to our Design, and op't a
gap for Liberty to enter; severed themselves from their Coleagues, drawn up a
manifesto to the Kingdom, divulged that they intend to purchase absolute
freedom, and break in sunder the heavy yoke of Kings, and as persuaded of a
happy Issue, that all the Vulgar will join as one man, they call it an
AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE


What speaks thy have?


I come from the high and mighty States of Putney, who by me do desire the
instant pressence bout matters of import


Return our service, and that we will wait on um. Sol, to night. Regi, This
night. Sol, I shall inform them so


Now, what think thou has brought forth this hasty Summons?


Something in Agitation on my life that does concern our present Interrests;
for my part I Am resolved


The like am I, to bring to pass what I intend or did.


I like thy resolution, flag not my wings; Ple soar aloft, over the trunkes of
Kings


THus do these Wolves consult, combine,
To root out all that is Divine;
The five Statesmen of Turnum-Green
Now care not, though their Acts are seen;
They v^w for to kill CHARLES their Lord,
And level all men by the sword;
And to themselves, they do propose
Another Leader should be chose;
They will new mold both Church and State,
Be to the People as their fate,
And not look (...)
Their strange confused Anarchee
Erected; and on waxen wings:
Soar 'bove all sublunary things,
The to effect, PETER'S and DELL,
Leacherous Jew, treacherous Infideli,
Desired are to give their doom,
And what shall of their King become;
By Poison some, some by surprise
Would have him fall each does devise
A way of death; yet while they stand
Co^sulting, he escap^s their hand.
O Treason of the worst Intent,
Such as Ravill^ack never meant.
Religion both sides do pretend,
But either to a different end;
They out of zeal would rear their own,
Those out of zeal would pull all down;
O bless us from both, but yet compare
Faux ^n the vault, these in the Chair;
Though 'twas an unsuccessefull sin,
Fixed those without, worse are within.

IF w^e observe the middle time of this Eclipse or full Moon, she defluxeth
from the opposition of the Sun, to the Conjunction of Saturn and immediately
after to the opposition of Venus, and then to the opposition of Mercury, who
is the chief and domineering Plannet in the Eclipse: -- here is no body -- I
laugh to think how queintly I deceive the credulous world, by making them
believe strange things: they come to me is to some Oracle, to be resolved of
doubts; and by my Soplustrie I so delude them, that they return contented and
admiring; and I that know not whether Ptolomy were man or horse, am counted
Englands Arch-Astrologer; yet some esteem me but a juggling wizard, one made up
of tautologies and barbarism, and this all would confess knew they my
windings, how I deceived the rare and gallant Lady, Fair Arnabella Scroope,
giving her to my friend John How of Lincolns-Inne: the story thus, The
Gentleman ingratiates himself into the favor of this Lady, comes to me for
advice, (and in troth) craves some unlawful helps to gain her; large promises
he made me in case I brought his wish to pass, gave a round sum in hand,
and since I knew my own unablenesse (to compass it by Art) I did resolve to
act by policy, and to that end advised him to break his mind unto some
trusty friend, one whom he durst rely on, he to persuade the Lady Arnabella to
come to me, to be resolved 'bout some horary question, and who should be her
husband (for at this time two gallant Lords were Suitors to her) this was
effected, the young Lady comes to me as to some Prophet; I told her that she
should not marry (for direful plagues would follow) either of those young
Lords, but another Gentleman, whom destiny and my skill pointed at, of such a
stature, hair and habited; and for her better satisfaction in the point, wished
her to go into Spring-Garden, and at the end of such a walk she should meet
him ordained to be her husband, and if fhee married him, she should be the most
fortunate woman in the world, if not the most happy under Heaven: Mr. How in
the interim is very punctual, and observed his directions to a hair, clad in
the same habit which I had bid him wear, meets the betrayed Lady, the
appearance whereof so amazed and bewitched her, that even through fear of
fighting against the starr, she yields to marry him, her fortune being no less
then 2500 l. per annum, by this device I gained an hundred pieces but now a
desperate part I undertake, the Adjutators of five Regiments have sent to crave
my skill, and do desire I would by art resolve them, whether their Plots will
thrive and take effect, as if I knew what fate attends on things; but I must
please the fools and speak them fair, tell them the motions of the Heavens
foretell lucky events to all their undertakings, as in my Alminackes I use to
say, when I cologue with them at Westminster


Sir, sir here is a woman that has lost some goods, her maid is run away, and
carried with her six silver spoones, a pair of holland sheets, with diverse
napkins


Admit her, Would you good Woman, ought with me,


Yes Sir, somethings of mine are stolen, by whom your man informed you: I do
desire Sir, that by art you will tell where the wench is, that I may prosecute
her, and here is a good Angel Sir to guard you


When were they lost?


Yesternight Sir, about three a clock in the morning.


Let me see the first Saturn, the second Mars, the third Mercury; Mercury is
a Thief; Woman, thy goods were stolen


O Lord Sir, yes indeed were they.


What Countrey-woman was your Servant?


Glamorganshire Sir, and a friend of mine that lately came from thence told me
he met her on the way


Give me the Map of Britain, let me see England, Scotland, Wales,
Brecknockshire, Herefordshire, Glamorganshire, -- I see her -- I see her, she
has a pack under her arm, my art tells me Mistres she is gone down to her
friends, there you may find her


I thank you Sir, may Heaven increase your art.


Ha, ha, ha. Thus do I by my knavish art

Get more, than he that acts an honest part.


THis is the slave has wounded England more
Then the Committees, sat at Goldsmihs hall;
Then the Excise, never heard of before
Then our State Sophies (and the Devil and all)
He still has told (by guess) the Rebels should
In the end beat the Royal Party down,
And has presumed to foretell (for Gold)
That they should make a prize of Charles his Crown.
The Traitors, even ready for to sink
Like drowning men, took hold of his weak stay,
And once again recovered the brinke,
And so escaped the Whirle-poole of decay.
And now in triumph through the streets are borne,
Trampling upon all those that Loyal are,
And at poor Englands miseries do scorn,
While King, and Peoples Lands they amongst them share.
For them both Land and Seas are searched, the Skies
Cannot afford them foul enough (they make)
All that is Englands Treasure, lawful prize,
Killing those that the least resistance make.
For now with Lucifer, their reign being short,
They rage extremely, and blaspheme against heaven:
But now the Traitors want their chief support,
Their props are all pulled forth, their Rock is riven.

NOw to the point of the business; how does our Printed Papers take?


As well as heart can think, the people swallow them amain.


But what means shall we use to draw the rest of the Army on our side? It will
be hard for us alone to bring to pass our great design, without there be joint
consent of all, we run a desperate hazard


For that my Brother Patricide, and I have so well dealt, that the whole Army
at next Rendevou^, resolve for to declare for Anarchy, and live and dye with us


For to depose their timorous General, who seems to be averse to such
designs terming them wicked and to be abhorr'


But here is our Noble John, whom we will elect to be our Captain General to
guide us through all difficult adventures and actions (...) to be achieved


We Will cut our safety through their Coats of Steel, and write our Laws (as
Draco did) in blood: I that have dared for to encounter Highgate Hill, nor put
my Armor off till I do strike my Sword on London-stone, and be proclaimed Lord
of London


Thy resolution is magnanimous and worthy thy great self renowned Hero, but
yet let us join Policy with strength, and do our best to ^ring our Cohorts
in, we are yet but an handful if compared with those vast Legions that may
join with us


I shame to hear you run so rashly on without consideration, and sell the
Foxes skin ere he is taken; know you not that King Charles does live, he that
six years maintained feirce War against us, and did His utmost to race out
our names from under heaven, is He not now at Hampton Court respected like a
King, and yet in hope once more to graspe the Scepter


It Is true* and while he is we cannot be.


He is the run unbiasses our Boules be the ground never so Level, and while He
breaths we are not sure of life


Is there no one that dares put forth his hand, and gall His vital thread?


Yes, here stands one, that for his Nations good and for the promulgation of
the Gospel dares hew down that tall Cedar


Do It Regicide, and be renowned for ever, Posterity shall solemnize thy name
in Songs unto the Timbrill, the Virgins of our Land shall deck thy head with
Anadems of flowers, and thou fill up a Page in the Callender


Patricide and I will undertake to do it, yet will not act the bloody deed our
selves, our Ministerial Coat prohibits that, but we will see it done


What means shall we provide?


I hold it best by poison.


He is too wary what he eats, it must be by assault.


Now I think on it, tomorrow he rides forth on hunting; about the time that he
s^ts out I Will lay an ambush in some covert place, and with an hundred bold
adventros Blades, surpr^ze his person, bear him thence to some place that is
far remote, there keep him clogged with Irons, till we take order for his
death


And yet mean time, if opportunity will aptly aid us we will save you so much
laour


Thanks to you all for your kind choice of me; now to your several
Regiments, you kn^w tomo^row is a busy day; and with the rest of the Army you
must meet (...), where I will be, but in a (...) manner, where if the rest
join with us, Futra, for all our Foes; He make the House of Lords horse one
another, while I do lash their Buttocks, the Presbyters shall peep through
Pillories, and he that has most money prove most miserable: Come on, and let us
away

My soul does long to see the dismal day.

The cursed trap is laid, the ^oile is set
That they intend to take the Lion in;
And thus one ill another does beget,
While they (make* known) that sin must thrive by sin;
Think, what after may be tide
And that sin bears, a sharp w^^p at her side.
The Devil that at first, was wont to stir
The People up, to their own woe and loss;
To bring their Coin and Plate it, to raise war,
All Laws both morrall and divine to cross,
Get into their Trustees, and forced them on
To act a priviledg'd Rebellion.
From them the Spirit went into the Traitors,
That now had plotted for to kill their King,
And told them it concerned Adjutators
To LEVEL all, community to bring.
And when he is cast out, where will he go;
There Is none besides that can be tempted so.

What direful Planet is it that thwarts my hopes? did I but know I Would seal
Joves starry roof, there seize upon it, and throw it down from thence, like
Lucifer from Heaven. O my accursed Fate, this ominous day has blasted all my
hopes


Fly fly, all that we hoped for quite is crossed, even our own are fallen from
us, and proffer their submission


What make you here? Do you not know Sir Thomas so has wrought by mild and
gentle Speechs, by his discreet and wise depo^tment, that not only our own
protest against us, but do acknowledge their revolt with tear


Curse light upon, 'embase, unstable Grooms.


This Rendevouze at Ware has marred us all; the soldiers of our several
Regiments have pulled their Protestations from their Hats, and do excuse them
to the General, as drawn away, by our pernicious Counsels


The fate of Monarchy is not yet determined for a subversion, the King is fled
away from H^mpton-Court, and our designs are frustrate


What an harsh melody this Quire of Scritch-Owles make; Mischief finds many
Messengers


With our own Mines our Castles in the Air are all blown up.

The Soldiers of our several Regiments are once more all turned round,
nothing is heard amongst them now, but protestations of obedience unto their
noble Chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax


Here comes two Ravens more; what will they croak?


The Heavens conspire against us; which way can we look, and not behold our
ruin


Let Whirle-windes enter sp^ngie hills, and bear them thick and threefold on
our heads, until we buried lie in deeper graves then those of old, that durst
attempt the Heavens* I see the Almighties self with his Sword drawn, bearing
his dreadful Thunder in his hand, armed cap a pe with lightning, riding on the
swift Winds, stands ready to defend CHARLES, and his CROWN, against all
Conspiracy against him


It Is vain to strive against the Destinies, let each shift for himself.

And let the world know this, that those which strive

Against lawful Kings, their Plots shall never thrive.


THus Traitors for a while may hope
To bring their ends about,
But in the e^d embrace a ROPE,
Or else are whooted out.
Our dearest Lord, great CHARLES, does live
Us comfort yet to bring,
And maugre those would him deprive,
MUST Reign, GREAT BRITAINS KING.
Le Heaven shower upon his Head
The blessings of the Day,
And when his soul is thither fled,
Grant that his Son may sway.


