It Is strange Fidelius that they should Recover!
'Twas said their wounds were Morral*
The Heavens are surely angry,
And lock their Azure Portals against our prayers,
Menacing the wors of miseries;
They would not else insuse their powerful influences
To rescue Traitors from their punishments.
Oh Fidelius, when I but think what they have done by Butchering Sacred Majesty
--
I am astonished!
What 'ist these fear to do?
They Would Martyr JOVE, could they come at him too:
But yet I Will not despair, but by my Constancy
And Faith vanquish all miseries:
Our griefs be folly; our Tears cannot suffice,
Unless our hearts make Charles a sacrifice.

Content thy self Constantius; though Traitors flourish,
and such dunghill weeds sprout up through fatness of the soil.
It Is but a time, and a time present too,
Then they will be weeded out:
They cannot demur, adjourn, or say to morrow;
When their Accountant calls, they must obey,
Though now they do over Truth and Justice sway.
The people say they were recovered by a miracle, wrought by one Peter's an
Excorcist, and now admire, adore, and think them Gods, more then they did
before; And say 'twas Justice made great Charles to bleed


Blind ignorant wretches, that cannot perceive Gods from Devils; Impostors from
Potentates; it is but in vain to inform them, till their own folly make them
sensible; But does Cromwell mean to steer his Course for Ireland


For Hell he does.


I, that has been his Journey these seven years;

He will come to his journies end in time,
But to Ireland I doubt he will not.

He tells the People that he will go, but that is in the Mystery; he intends
nothing less in the History: It Is to get arrears, what men and money he can,
and then Fairfax will soon understand whether he intends


I hope his first days march will be to guard him to Tower Hill, according to
his desers, to make that his Headquarters; and after retreat to Westminster
and be Crowned, and then he may make Deputies, and not expose himself to
hazards upon so desparate a Design, as Ireland is like to prove: Oh you know
not the subtilty of that Jesuitical-head-piece! A little time will make known
his intents: whilst then we will observe the cause^ of their vile Actions, and
discourse the Effects to our selves; yet let us be as secret as we can; these
Serpents will sting us else

We Will be as wise as Serpents, Serpents to prevent,
To Loyal-Doves, we will prove as Inocent.

Wee're now at Amity, and made both one* I hope there will remain no Jealousies
or Fears each of other


I have not any the least Jealousy or Fear of thee my deer Lieutenant; but
hug thee as my second Self: Oh that I could by this embrace beget a wit like
thine; the State wants Policy as well as Money; and mine is but little, thine a
full Magazine to arm a Kingdom, and muster all Designs, Plots and Stratagems
of State with safety and ease to keep, what we have waded through blood and
danger to obtain


My Lord, I am your Servant, and the States; and must, and will endeavor to
keep for them what I have got: But still my Lord, the People are too rich and
powerful, they must have more Taxes and more Assessements to keep them under;
and when they are poor and needy, they will be the more our vassals, and subject
to our power: Have not the peremtory slaves disarmed Capt. Thelwels troop at
Drayton in Shropshire, taken both their Horse and Arms, and stripped them to
their skins? Have they not at Chester done the like? and since in
Worcestershire? Come, come, they will Robel unless we make them poor; let us Tax
them thoroughly; worse language then they do, they cannot give us; therefore
lets about it; you to the Parliament and I to the Council of State presently

Money's the life of War, and must be had,
Although we make the silly Hyndes run mad.

Is my husband gone to the Parliament House Ruth?


Yes verily Mistress; he is gone amongst the Members, the holy-members, the
fructifying-members, the increasing and multiplying-members. Indeed Madam,
something was the matter my Master called for Beer so early this morning; Ha,
ha, ha, I hope it will appear ere long: I promise you I thought something
notwithstanding when he fetched such a draught, (...) pitt^y your Case Madam,
but cold not cry; pardon me, I am your waiting-Maid, and can a little
understand what belongs to the case of a Gentlewoman


If thou had as much cause as I, thou might cry (...) dye too: I Will tell
thee Ruth, he lies by me all night like a logge, though I warm him, and warm
him again, yet notwithstanding I can get no life nor motion in him; And when my
desires are fervent and ready for the onset, he like a Coward faces-about,
falls off, and basely retreates, and will observe no postures at all: Nay, if
he would but Present, it is so hot upon the matter, that it would go near to
give fire, and discharge it self, and do execution too: Let me woe him, and woe
him, he will do nothing, starts in his sleep, cries out Blood, blood, and
says he is damned in his bed; and Verily, verily, I must say unto thee Ruth;
that I think he is bewitched, for since he had the last wound with the fall on
his Sword, he has been so cold, and as useless to me, as a King is to England


Intruth la Mistress get another, the world is not so dull, if one will not another
will; It Is no matter for Fame, it is but a Bladder of wind, one prick of a
Pin^^ lets it ou^; if you have a mind to taste the sweets of Love, satisfy
your desires to the full; I shall be as useful to put it forward as another

She that confines her beams to one man's sight,
Is a dark Lanthorn to a glorious light.
Madam I Will fetch the Party you wot of.

Prithee do. I hate all bloudy-men, give me the man that arms with an embrace;
can make, not kill a man: O how powerful is Love, that it can make an unjust
Act seem honest, nay lawful too --


What makes my Love thus solitary and alone? Come my Life, my Happiness, lets
taste some sweets shall make the gods to envieus; There is no pleasure, but in
thy embrace


You men love to flatter us, and we like silly fools are pleased with all that
comes from them we love


I Will please thee if I can my Deer, the Paphian Goddess never was worthy of
such love as thee; Lets in and taste

And by our close in-twines,
We Will teach the wood-him, to embrace the Vines.

We must be secret though, because o'th wicked, they are apt to scandal us, and
bring us on their Stages; yet I have done the best to have my husband put them
down, yet all will not do


Come my dear, I Will ^^^thee down, and act a part, shall ravish thee, and cheer
thy grieved heart

Such acts best please, whose s^^nes relish of love,
Sound Music then, and revish from above.

So, now we are in our Kingdom: What is it to enjoy the World, and miss the
thing we love? Here is a Jewel for thee, 'twas the late Queens, wear it for my
sake, and come to me to morrow, thou shall have Gold what thou will have; thou
shall not want if the State has it: Spend freely, and when it is gone, thou
shall have more. My Noll shall fight with the Irish, thou shall fight with me,
clad in more softer Arms. Abigail how sits this Gown


It bears an exceeding Grace behind; Madam, you have rumpled the Pleats with
your Day-Couch, will you have another


Fetch me the Cown that cost 2000 pounds, if it likes me, I Will put it on; My
dearest Marley shall see how it becomes me; and embrace me in it


So sweet a body deserves the rarieties of Europe, and all to little to dec^
you Madam, I am doubly blessed to enjoy so noble a Mistress as your self


Lets in my dear, and sport a while,
And with sweet love, the tedious time beguile.

Yet I have managed State-Affaires with case and ^^ill, and thrive and am grown
Rich by my industrous practice: Here Is Letters from Scotland I fear will not be
pleasing; (...) I must deliver them; Yet I hope by this new troubling the
waters I shall get most Fish; I Will in, and seek my Lord General presently


Am I awake, or in a Dream? or do I walk in my Sleep? This is no vision sure:
methoughts I saw two (whom I am loath to name) glude like a pair of Goats in a
sportful dalliance; I must wink at this, there is danger to disclose it, least
that her husband should not credit me, and she should lay that to my Charge,
was acted by the other; It may be her Lord Consents: I know not what to think!
If these be Queent-street doings, I Will to Kings-street to the Lieutenant General
to see what he will say to these Letters. I Will be silent, there is nothing to be
got by this discovery; besides it is my own case at home daily

He that will wind his borne in his own rounds
May chance to be devoured by his own hounds.

If this trade fails, then farewell all; Albertus was a mere Jugler to me; and
Friar Bacon but an empty scull, or brazen Image, his Walls of Brass, were Mud
to mine: Preaching is too redious for me; I Will leave that to Owen, and to
Goodwin: Have I not done a Miracle to re-possesse these Bodies with Spirits,
that were before mere Skellitons, and stinking Carcasses? (by their dispairing
rage) they are now as active as ever they were; and possessed with worser
Spirits, if worser can be, to manage the grand Design; But before I proceed
further in my Art, I must raise the Ghost of Dorrislaw, and ask his Counsel.
Make a Circle and Cunjueres

My hair stands upright! a flash of Lightning has gone through my body, and cut
my thread of Life a too; I have no power to speak


What Is he that calls me from my place of horror, where all my music is dismal
shrieks of damned Souls, yelling in beds of burning Brimston; Couches of
poisonous Toads and stinging Serpents? O M. Peter's is it you? you shall along
with me


I pray thee gentle Ghost forbear, and tell me if the late King be in these
lower Regions


No, thou Viper, he reigns in Heaven; in Hell there are new torments providing
answerable for that damned Crime without all presidents but Bradshaw. Cook, and
Steel, and such as those have forged

Knaves hired by Cromwell to corrupt the Laws:
Now all made food for Hells devouring jaws.
Next Judas, Faux, and Ravilock, their lodgings are prepared: there lies Essen,
Pym, Strend, Hamden, Rainthrough, and ten thousand more; there Fairfax,
Cromwell, Ireton, Pride, will all like me, Rue their damned Regicide

Their vengeance hastneth, and come on a main,
Though the first be gone, the Second Charles shall Reign.

Let me go tell them this.


No, thou must not; Pluto will not give way,
His Fiends attend; and will not longer stay.

I Will enter here, and see if I can meet with such a sight I did before.

Hell and ^^mnation (...) what, ^re we all turned Sodomites -- O my head, how
it ^^es, I Will home presently; and If Roe be there, what shall I do? fight with
him I dare not; ^will but be the worse; for then my wife will take his part:
since others being my betters wear the horn; I Will think it honor, never dream of
scorn: but my neighbor will call me Wittall, that is the worst

No matter, I am never the worse,
The Fox thrives best, when that the Geese do curse.
Since it is our fate; and now grows all the fashion*
I Will rather honor, then disgrase the Nation.
I Will love the man* that makes my Wife his mate*
And hug his Purse, till he does horn my pate.

But does the news hold true concerning Ire^^nd?


Too true, I fear; We must divert our Course some other way; Ormond is 20000
strong; it is thought he is now (...) Fortifying all the Ports, and then intends
for England


I would we had him here.

It Is not a hundred thousand that we fear. Our Horse are lusty, and our Men be
strong


I, but our Money's weak; how shall we do for that the People will not disburse?


Can we not force it then? Necess^^y must not observe a Law; make them but
poor, and then we shall not want Soldiers nor Moneys: Are we not the Keepers
of their L^berties? why not their Money too

We will disburse, give them as they deserve,
It they will not sight; then let them h^ng and starve.

When we have all; we will order them at will: If we suffer them peaceably to
enjoy their Estares; we must not look to enjoy ours; No, I hold it best to
kirb^ them in, be s^^e to keep them down

Prosperity will always aim to get a Crown.


Besides, when we have all; we know what to trust too; and not before: then we
can disburse at our pleasures; and rather then want; if there be urgent
necessity, make use of our own Estates at last, but not before; it is our best
policy to preserve all we can against a rainy day: Lands are but d^^^
Commodities, they will not off; besides we cannot mans^^^^ them: Money it is
must do the deed

That Is our best friend, should we but be in ^^ed.


We Will have it then: Come le^^ draw our Force^ into the Countries first; and
then we will come upon the City with afresh supply

Fairfax ^^rall down; for he is grow^ to hi^*


Will they murmer still? Indite me for Murder! Who dares do it? have I not
Forces to protect my self? this is Lilburn and his Faction; they will never be
quiet till they have my life; but perchance I Will have some more of theirs first


Hang up two or three more, 'twill make the rest to fear.


'Twas by your Counsel I hanged up those I did: Did you not at War^ persuade me
to have Arnold shot, and L^ckier since; that wone me hate of all my Soldiers,
and the People too


And that I hope will quickly end thy fate.
My Lord, Justice must be done; you know I, in all such cases,
cannot help ye; I am called hence and must away; the safety
of the State requires it: Farewell my Lord;
If that my Plot hit right:
My Policy shall Conquer all your Might.

My Lieutenant is too wise for me; well, if he does set the People on me for
their Agreement I am lost; I fear it is his Policy to withdraw himself, that
they may have the better opportunity to surprise me, and free himself, so they
cut me off; that he may enjoy all: Something is in it; I am so troubled in my
sleep

My wife afflicts me too, which makes me weep.


What Game is there in this Park?


O Sir; here be Staggs of State, Hearts, Bucks, Does, Sorrells, Sores Teggs,
Prickets, Fawns; and abomination of Fish and Foul


Will you give me the Names of them all, because (...) may know what to thank
the Parliament for (...) they have bestowed much of us, for this one Dinner;
enough to make us many: Staggs and Hearts I have heard of in the City; and Bucks
too; but Teggs, Brocks, Sores, and Prickets, I know not what they mean: pray
are they Fish, or Fowl


Neither Sir: they are Beasts, that come to it by degrees, as your Children
newly born, first they come to be Fawns, and then in their youth, they come to
be Prickets; in their prentiship, to be Brockets; in their freedom, to Bucks of
the first head; when Common Councel-men, of the second head, when Aldermen, of
the Game Royal; and then you may know them by their Brow-Antlers: And for the
Hinds and Does they be the Femals, as it might be your wives, or your Sons
wives


It seems there is a Commonwealth in a Park; but do they engender too?


Yes Sir, in Rutting-time; how could they increase else? only they defile their
members


But do they do the Act like us?


Very like you Sir; but increase more.


Are there Conies too?


Yes Sir, more then you have in your City.


But does not some vermin anoy them?


Yes Sir, but we have another vermin called Ferits and Tarryers, that like
your Worships Clark Everet, can enter their grounds and so ferrit their beries,
that many times their skins pay for their offenses; and then our traps are just
like your prisons


Their skins may serve to furre us Gowns.


Sir, no Skarlet nor Plush is finer wear.


Hereafter, you must preserve them for us then.


Sir, they are my Fees; besides your Worships should not be clad in Foxes, or
in Pole-catts skins, least you be termed vermin; the Lions, or the Panthers,
or the Ermyns skine is more rich and fitting for your wear


I know no great degrees of skins; methinks the Asses hide's as serviceable as
the Lions skin, and more fit for ornament


There be Asses too Sir in the Park.


Then for Fowl and Fish, what store is there?


O^^, they ^esin^^ite ^here be Owle^, Wood cocks, Buzards, Cuckoes, Rooks,
Wiggins, and all ^e^^ Worship^^^cen desire: Besides Parliament Pu^trick^,
Halpyes, Night-Ravens, S^^eech-Owles, and whatever your Worships can name. And
for Fish, here be Pikes, that like those you know where, eat up their own
kind; and C^^ps that die wallowing in the M^^^de (like your Worships in your
feather, beds;) besides the Carpes may serve for your servants, and the people;
and great Tench, that you may ca^ch without books or pullies; besides Roach,
Dace, Eles, Breams, Perch, and abundance more


Are there no Whales, Saturn o^s or Lobsteks there?


No Sir, they are in the Seas, where your Worships Ships sail.


I had thought they had come from hence.


Well Brethren, it behooves us to give thanks to the Council of S^^^ and the
Parliament for all these benefits, and a (...) n^^ them the Sum; it is but
150000. l. a mere toy; if the Sea be but secured by their Navy, we shall fetch
it up again in a year, and less


Content, content, let them have it, let them have it; and our Letter of Thanks
(...) boor

Since we have b^^k, O^d Sport and Deer such store;
If they do ask, they shall have ten times more.

Yes, yes no doubt but they will be as free to you, of that that is not their own.
(...) aside. The ^ight Ma^^^, Pa^^^, Cha^es and Forests, are liberally
bestowed; the old proverb must be verified, Lightly come, lightly go, but they
that steal a Deer off the Kings Ground, the Horns may hereafter chance to choke
them; but they that steal Deer, Trees, Lands and all; the very stones will fly
in their faces I hope: What it blessed litter of City-puppies have I to my
Masters? O for a pack of good bloud-hounds to set on these Actaeons: Uds --
fut, these be mere Gulls, Buffle-pates; there is not a man of them has so much
wit, us will reach from his nose to his beard: foh -- how they stink; I think
some (...) them have be-shitt themselves. Will your Worships please to see some
sport (...) the Game is ready, the Buck is Rour^d


-- (...) -- looe, -- ha -- loo^ -- (...) -- tat, -- tat, -- tat.


This is heavenly Music.


Wooed these Currs were choked, I cannot hear it for them.


Why, it is the Dogs that makes it.


I had thought it had been come from the Skies. The Buck is down already.


It Is time we seek our Company, and give over the Chase.


This is no Chase Sir, it is a Park.

We are summond in; let us haste away,
This idle sport has quite consumed the day.
Let Us tell our selves, and see if we have all our Company.


Here Is two missing!


I Will lay a Pot of Ale of that; have you told your self Sir?


I Will tell again.

There wants four now -- O, Alderman Soams, and Alderman Chambers did not come;
there was but 13 came, and now there is but 11; then as I take it, two are
wanting


But how shall we know which two?


It Is my Lord Mayor, and Alderman Atkins are missing.

O Gentlemen, Gentlemen, your Mayor has hanged himself in a Tree, and if you go
not quickly he is a dead man; and another is fallen into a pit, and has so
bewrayed himself, it is wonderful! I think he has broke his neck, for he
stirre^ not


Brethren away, I fear there is some Treason.


Treason (...) Traitors! Is not that Nonsense (...) I have done my best to
Lodge the Deer on that side the P^^^ where the most trees and the pitts were;
but surely that is not reason; and yet I know not neither, for (...) everything
(...) made treason, though it be but Reason in I Will away to (...) it is good to
prevent a mischief

Farewell old Custard-eaters; I hold it reason.
Not to serve you, for fear I commit treason.

THe Devil stop your mouths; will nothing serve you but The Agreement of the
People, The Agreement of the People! Are not the Parliament the Peoples
Represe^^^ives? why, do not they Agree? I am willing to Agree to any thing; yet
must their splee^ light upon me? O Cromwell, Cromwell, for this I may thank thee;
I am so heavy, sad and drowsy, I must take Rest

WHo on the top of Fortunes Wheel.
Stands more glorious then the rest?
Others sorrows li^^^ feel,
Thinking all like them at blessed.
Guide the Chariot of the Sun,
And thence blind with too much light,
Such un-even Courses run,
That they turn the day to night.
These are they that cannot see,
Dazzled with the height of place,
How they may secured be
Of the peoples fickle grace.
But pretend their hearts so deep,
They are hopeless there to wade;
Where did they but measure keep,
Fortunes Children should not sade.
Greatness here may learn to stand
Propt with Virtue, so it shall
Fearlesse from rude peoples hand
Sleep on Down, or softer fall.
Fumes of Sway must pass away,
Rebels fall, that stand by Art;
Charles His Virtue still shall sway.
And all England take His part^ (...)
What though Rebels fret and frown,
That durst aspire unto a Throne*
Virtue is a Sacred Crown,
Subject unto none but O^^.
A C^^^d, a ga^^d; Treason, treason; I am betray (...) O my distempered Fa^^y*
how strange guilt (...) within, well, since it is so (...) it is but a folly to
despair; and to ^^pent, would argu^^ I were guilty; I have had strange dreams
(...) all it not well* Well come what will, ^e bide the shock of all; And if I
stand, I stand; it may I ^^ll


Where be the Murderers? seize on them; knock them down: knock them down;
Traitors, Tyrants, bloud-suckers; away with them


Who builds his Hopes upon a Comm^n Rou^, Thus must he f^ll, though for their
Rights he fought


Now my dear Fidelius; how likest thou the times now? do they not change apace?
doe^ not Divine Justice clearly demonstrate to the World their guilt, and dog
them at the heels? do not the Phat^^^ ^^mble now? Blood must be revenged;
Murder and Patricide, although concealed long, at last betrays it self; nay
often times proves his own executioner; but this licensed and open wickedness,
invites all hands to take Revenge


The People threaten revenge on all; and do dispute their deaths before their
ends: some report Bradshaw has hanged himself, another drowned; a third is
st^bb'd; when as they speak but as they would have it; or as it must be: Thus they
often times say, He Is a dead man, that is but condemned; and so are they by
heavens Impartial Law; they are but reprieved a while, the day will come

They suffer must, a most assured doom;
That Subject make his Sovereigns heart to bleed,
Will find a Subject shall revenge the deed.

It Is true Fidelius; but they never think of that; Rebellion so bewitches them,
they know not what they do; but with stupidity and ignorances; resolve to
finish what they have begun, though to scale heaven, or to put out the Sun


When did you see Rebellion prosper? But for black damned Regicide, (by Cook
and Rad^^thus Se^^l accounted lawful) it is a sin made Iud^^ beholding to a
(...) to ease his Conscience, but these far worse then R^^^agaces or Jews,
must expect Judgments worse

The more their sins against light, the worse their Curse.


They say that Fairfax does die to day; shall we go see him.


No, I love not to see the death of any man; nor have I envy at their persons,
but their Crimes; I Would rather see them live honest men, then to die Traitors.
This is Cromwels Policy, now he has filled this Sp^^ge to squeze him; till
another does so much for him, which will not be long; if Overton speak true;
that Bull's designed for the slaughter next; if he were but well baited first
in (...)


Dublin is for certain taken, Londonderry cannot held out; which makes me think
he can do little good there if that he were Landed, which is a thing almost
impossible


Let Us leave the success to him tha^ prosecutes; and into (...).

The Sun decines, and takes leave of the West.


Come b^i^^^ion a way; I never thought he would come to better end, fine* he
(...) hi^ word as New Mark^^^ and likewise his Oath and Covenant with his King,
and his dear Brethren the Scots


you had best repent; your time's but short.


Your Pardon from His Holiness is firm;


This is a Jesuit, a Jesuit: Hang him, hang him.


Nay pray good people spa^e my Life, and give me have to speak; I shall tell
you what will make you wonder


Speak then; but be brief, pr^^raction may cause another Change.


And so it will; Let the Sheriff look in the N^pe of my Lord (...) neck.

The Sheriff looks in the N^pe of his ^eck, and finds a Charm, which he pulls
away; and his Carcass falls and leaves a noisome stench.


What Is the meaning of this, good Sir?


It is a Charm; the words are dubious, and cannot be made sense of; and this he
brought from Holland; Cromwell has the same; 'twas to preserve their Carcasses
while such a time expired; else they had been dead long time before; and often
killed by others


How come it then that Peter's cured them?


Peter's weary of Preaching Schism; and finding others preferred before him,
turns Necromancer, and deals in the black Art: Now their Charms was to preserve
them from others hurts, but not their own; they falling by their own swords,
were by Peter's, re-possessed with Devils, which gave motion to their bodies


Is the Execution past?


More Witches, more witches; fall upon them, stone them.


My Husband murdered! Draw Mr Gorge.


I met with you there Sir;


Nay then thou villain have at thee.

And for thee Mrs ^r^^, ('it is no time to s^^ld) (...)


Here is a sudden Tragedy indeed;

I doubt there is more ere long will bleed.


Hang them, stone them; Witches, Murderers, Th^^ves, Impostures: Let Us Petition
our King home; we shall never be happy else


Content, Content;

Come Royal CHARLES, and with a cloud of thunder
Disperse this bed of Snakes, and keep them under.


