COme Neighbors let me tell you, and in troth I have spoke like a man in my
days, and hit right too, that if this business do but displease his Graces
fancy, we are all made men for ever


I believe so too neighbor, but is all our company here?


You had best to call them generally man by man according to the Scrip.


Here is the scrowl of every man's name which is thought fit through all Athens,
to play in our interlude between the Duke and the Duchess on his Wedding day
at night


First good Peter Quince say what the Play treats of, then read the names of
the Actors, and so grow on to a point


Marry our play is the most Lamentable Comedy, and most cruel death of Pyramus
and Thisbe


A very good piece of work I assure you, and a merry; now good Peter Quince
call forth your Actors by the Scrowl, Masters spread your selves


Answer as I call you, Nicolas Bottom the Weaver.


Ready, name what part I am for, and proceed.


You Nic. Bottom are set down for Pyramus.


Wat is Pyramus, a Lover or a Tyrant?


A Lover that kills himself most gallantly for Love.


That will ask some tears in the true performing of it, If I do it, let the
audience look to their eyes: I will move storms, I will condole in some
measure, to the rest, yet my chief humor is for a Tyrant. I could play Eroles
rarely, or a part to tear a cat in two, make all split, the raging Rocks, and
shivering shocks shall break the locks of Prison gates, and Phibbus carre shall
shine from far, and make and mar, the foolish fates: Now name the rest of the
Players. This is Eroles reign, a Tyrants reign, a Lover is more condoling


Francis Flute the Bellowes-mender


Here Petter Quince


You must take Thisbe on you,


What is Thisbe a wandering Knight?


It is the Lady that Pyramus must love.


Nay faith, let not me play a woman, I have a beard coming


That's all one, you shall play it in a mask and you may speak as small as you
will


And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too. I Will speak in a monstrous
little voice Thisne Thisne, ah Pyramus my lover dear thy Thisbe dear and
lover dear


No no, you must play Pyramus, and Flute you Thisbe


Well proceed.


Robbin Starveling the Tailor


Here Peter Quince


Robbin Starveling you must play Thisby's mother. Tom Snout the Tinker


Here Peter Quince.


You Pyramus father, my self Thisby's father, Snug the Joyner you the Lions
part; and I hope there is a play fit


Have you the Lions part written? Pray you if it be, give it me for I am slow
of study


You may do it Ex tempore for it is nothing but roaring


Let me play the Lion too, I will Roar that I will do any man's heart good to
hear me, I will roar that I will make the Dake say let him roar again let him
roar agai


if you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Duchess and the
Ladies that they would shrike and that were enough to hang us all That would hang every mothers Son


I grant you friends that if they should fright the Laydes out of their wits,
they would have no more discretion but to hang us, but I will aggravate my
voice so that I will roar you as gentle as any Sucking Dove, I will roar and
twere any Nightinga


You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a sweetfaced man a proper man
as one shall see in a Summers day, a most lovely Gentleman like man, therefore
you must needs play Pyramus


Well I will undertake it, what beard had I best play it in?


Why what you will


I will discharge it either in your straw colored beard, your Orange Tawny
beard, your purple in grain beard, or your French crown colored beard, your
perfect Yellow


Some of your French crowns have no hair at all and then you will play barefaced.
But masters here are your parts and I am farther to entreat you, request you
and desire you, to con them by to morrow night, and meet me in the Palace Wood
a mile without the Town by moonlight, there we will rehearse, for if we meet in
the City we shall be doggd by company and our devices known; in the mean time
I will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants? I pray fail me not


We will meet and there we may rehearse more obscenely and Courageously. Take
pain. Be presect. Adieu


At the Dukes Oak we meet?


Enough hold or cut Bowstrings --


I am resolved and I will be revenged
Of my proud Queen Titania's injury,
And make her yield me up her beloved page;
My gentle Pugg come hither thou Rememberest
Since that I sat upon a Promontory,
And heard a Mermaid on a Dolphins Back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath,
That the rude Sea grew civil at her Song;
And certain States shot madly from their Spheres,
To hear the Sea-maids music.

I remember.


That very time I saw (but thou could not)
Flying between the cold Moon and the earth
Cupid all armed a certain aim he took,
At a fair Vestal throned by the west;
And loo'st his love-shast smartly from his bow,
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts:
But I might see young Cupids fiery shaft
Quench in the chaste beams of the watery Moon,
And the Imperial Votress passed on
In maiden meditation fancy free,
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell
It fell upon a little western flower
Before milk white now purple with loves wound,
And maidens call it love in Idleness;
Fetch me that flower the herb I showed thee once
The juice of it on sleeping eye lids laid
Will make or man or woman madly Dote
Upon the next live Creature that it sees;
Fetch me this herb and be thou here again
Ere the Leviathan can swim a league.

I Will put a Girdel about the earth in forty minutes.


Having once this juice;
I Will watch Titania when she is a sleep
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes,
The next thing when she waking looks upon
(Be it on Lion, Bear or wolf or Bull
On meddling Monkey or on busy Ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love
And ere I take this Charm from off her sight
(As can take it with another herb)
I Will make her render up her page to me.
Welcome wanderer, what ar't returned with it?

I there it it is.


Come give it me?
There is a bank Titania uses of
In nights to sleep on, but see where she comes
I Will stand aside you may depart.

Come now a Roundel and a fairy song
To please my eye first then entice me sleep
Then to your offices and let me rest

You Spotted Snakes with double tongue
Thorny Hedghoges be not seen
Newts and blind worms do no wrong
Come not mere our Fairy Queen
Philomele with melody
Singing your sweet Lullaby
Lulla lulla lullaby lulla lulla lullaby
Nere harm, nor spell nor Charm
Come our lovely Lady by
So goodnight with lullaby.

Weaving spiders come not here
Hence you longlegd spinners hence
Beetles black approach not near;
Worm nor snayle do no offense:
Philomele with melody. etc.

Hence away now all is well
One a loofe stand Centinell.

What thou see when thou do wake
Do it for thy true love take,
Love and languish for his sake;
Be it Ounce or Catt or Bear
Pard or Bore with Bristled hair
In thine eye that shall appear,
when thou awakest it is thy dear
Wake then some vile thing is near.

Are we all met?


Pat pat, and here is a mavelous convenient place for our rehearsal This green
Plot shall be our stage, This hauthorne Brake our tyring house, and we will do
it in action as we will do it before the Duke


Peter Quince.


What say thou Bully Bottom?


There are things in this Comedy of Pyramus and Thisby that will never please,
first Pyramus must draw a Sword to kill himself which the Ladies cannot abide,
how answer you that


Berlaken a parlous fear.


I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.


Not a whit, I have advice to make all well. Write me a Prologue, and let the
Prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus is
not killed indeed: and for the more better assurance tell them that I Pyramus
am nor Pyramus but Bottom the weaver, this will put them out of fear


Well, we will have such a Prologue and it shall be written in eight and six.


No make it two more let it be written in eight and eight.


Will not the Ladies be afraid of the Lion?


I fear it I Will promise you.


Masters we ought to consider with our selves to bring in (God shield us) a
Lion among Ladies is a most dreadful thing, For there is not a more fearful
wild-foule then your Lion living, and we ought to look to it


Therefore another Prologue must tell he is not a Lion.


Nay, You must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the Lions
Neck, and he himself must speak through saying thus, or to the same effect,
Ladies or fair Ladies, I would wish you, or I would request you, or I would
entreat you not to tremble; my life for yours, if you think I come hither as a
Lion it were pity of my life, no, I am no such thing I am a man as other men
are, and there indeed let him name his name and teil plainly I am Snug the
Joyner


Well it shall be so: But there is two hard things, that is to bring the moon
light into a Chamber, for you know Pyramus and Thisbe met by moonlight


Does the moon shine that night we play our play.


A Calender a Calender look in the Almanac find out moonshine sind out
moonshine


Yes, it does shine that night?


why then may you leave a casement of the great Chamber window where we play
open, and the Moon may shine in at the Casement


I, or else one must come with a bunch of Thorns and a Lantern, and say he
comes to disfigure, or to present the person of Moonshine. Then there is
another thing, we must have a wall in the great Chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe
(says the story) did talk through the Chink of a wall


You can never bring in a Wall, what say you Bottom?


Some man or other must present Wall, and let him have some Plaster, or some
Lome, or some Rough cast about him to signify Wall, or let him hold his
fingers thus, and through that Crany shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper


If that may be then all is well, come sit down every mothers son and rehearse
your parts, Pyramus you begin, when you have spoken your speech enter into that
Brake, and so every man according to his Cue --


What Hempen Home-spuns have we swaggering here so near the Cradle of the Fayry
Queen. What? a play toward? I Will be an Auditor, and Actor too perhaps if I sea
cause


Speak Pyramus Thisby stand forth.


Thisby, the flowers of Odious savours sweet.


Odours, Odours.


Odours savours sweet, so has thy breath my dearest Thisbe dear. But hark a
voice: stay thou but here a while, and by and by I will to thee appear


A stranger Piramus then ere played here.


Must I speak now?


I marry must you. For you must understand that he goes but to see a Noise that
he heard, and is to come again


Most Radiant Pyramus, Most Lilly white of hue. Of color like the red Rose on
triumphant Bryer. Most Brisky Juvenal, and the most lovely Jew. As true as
truest Horse that never yet would Tire. I Will meet thee Pyramus at Ninus Tomb


Ninus Tomb man: why, you must not speak that yet; That you answer to Piramus:
you speak all your part at once Cues and all, Piramus enter, your Cue is past,
it is, never Tire


O as true as truest Horse that yet would never Tire.


If I were fair Thisby I were only thine.


O monstrous! O strange! we are haunted; pray masters fly-Masters help.


I Will follow you, I Will lead you about a round. Through Bog, through Bush,
through Brake, through Bryar. Sometimes a Horse I Will be, sometimes a Hound, a
Hog, a headless Bear; sometimes a Fire, and Neigh, and Bark, and Grunt, and
Roar, and Burn, like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn


Why do they run away, this is knavery of them to make me afeard.


O Bottom thou art changed, what do I see on thee?


What do I see? you see an Asses head of your own do you?


Bless thee Bottom, bless thee, thou art translated.


I see their knavery, this is to make an ass of me, and fright me if they
could, but I will not stir from this place do they what they can, I will walk
up and down here, and will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid

The Woosel cock so black of hew,
with Orange Tawny bill.
The Thros'le with his note so true,
the Wren and little quill.

What Angel wakes me from my flowery bed?


The Finch, the Sparrow, and the Lark.
The Plain-song Cuckoo Gray,
whose note full many a man does Mark,
and dare not answer Nay.
For indeed who should set his wit to so foolish a bird? who would give a bird
the lie though he should cry Cuckoo never so


I pray thee gentle mortal sing again,
mine ear is much enamoured of thy note.
On the first view to say, to swear I love thee
so is mine eye enthralled to thy shape
and thy fair virtues force (perforce) does move me.

Me thinks (Mistress) you should have little reason for that, and yet to say
truth reason and love keep little company together now adays. The more the
pity that some honest neighbors will not make them friends. Nay I can Gleek
upon occasion


Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.


Not so neither: but if I had wit enough to get out of this Wood, I have enough
to serve my own t^^ne


Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shall remain here whether thou will or no.
I am a spirit of no common fare
The summer still does tend upon my state,
and I do love thee, therefore go with me
I Will give thee Fairies to attend on thee,
and they snall fetch thee jewels from the Deep,
and sing while thou on pressed flowers do sleep,
and I will purge thy mortal grosseness so,
That thou shall like a Ayery spirit go.

Ready and I, and I, and I, where shall we go.


Be kind and courteous to this Gentleman,
hop in his walks and Gambol in his eyes.
feed him with apricots and Dewberries,
with purple Grapes, Green Figs, and Mulberries.
The honey bags steal from the humble Bees,
and for white tapers crop their waxen thighs,
and light them at the fiery glow-wormes eyes
To have my love to bed and to arise,
And pluck the wings from painted Butterflies
To Fan the Moon-beames from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him Elves, and do him Courtesies.

Hail mortal Hail.


Hail.


Hail.


I cry your worships heartily mercy. I beseech your worships name.


Cobweb.


I shall desire you of more acquaintance good Master Cobweb, if I cut my
singer, I shall make bold with you. Your name honest Gentleman


Pease-blossome.


I pray commend me to Mrs. Squash your Mother and to Master Pease-cod your
Father, I shall desire of you more acquaintance too

Your name I beseech you Sir.

Mustard Seed.


Good Mr. Mustard Seed, I know your patience well? That same cowardly
Giant-like Ox-Beefe has devoured many a Gentleman of your house; I promise
your kindred have made my eyes water ere now. I desire you more acquaintance
good Master Mustard Seed


Come wait upon him, lead him to my Bower.
The Moon me thinks looks with a warry eye,
And when she weeps, weep every little Flower:
Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my lovers tongue, bring him silently.

I wonder if Titania he awaked.
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must door on in extremity.
Here comes my messenger, now now Mad spirit
What night-rule now about this haunted Grove?

My Mistress with a Monster is in love
Near to her Close and consecrated bower,
Whiles she was in her dull and sleeping hour
A Crew of Patches, rude Mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus Nuptial day.
The shallowest Thick-skin of that barren sort,
Who Piramus presented in their sport.
Forsook his Scene, and entered in a brake
Where I did him at this advantage take;
An Asses Nose I fixed on his head,
Anon his Thisby must be answered,
And forth my mimick comes when they him spy,
As Wild-geese that the creeping Fowler eye;
Or russet-pated Choughs many in sort
(Rising and cawing at the Guns report)
Sever themselves, and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
and at our stamp ore and ore one falls
He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak lost with their fear thus strong
Made senceless things begin to do them wrong.
For Briars and Thorns at their apparel snatch
Some sleeves, some hats, from Yeilders all things catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear,
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment so it came to pass
Titania waked, and straightway loved an ass.

This fall out better then I could devise,
I shall now be avenged upon my Queen.
But see she comes, I Will stand aside.

Come sit thee down upon this Flowery bed,
While I thy aimable Cheeks do coy,
And stick musk Roses on thy sleek smooth head,
And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle Joy.

Where Is Pease-blossome?


Ready.


Scratch my head Pease-blossome, where is Monsieur Cobweb.


Ready.


Monseur Cobweb, good Monseur get your weapons in your hand, and kill me a red
humble Be on the top of a Thistle, and good Monsieur bring me the honey bag.
Do not fret your self too much in the action Monsieur, and good Monsieur have a
care the honey bag break not, I would be loath to have you ore flown with a
honey bag Signior. Where Is Monsieur Mustard Seed


Ready.


Give me your newfe Monsieur Mustard Seed.
Pray le ave your Courtesy good Monsieur.

What Is your will?


Nothing good Monsieur, but to help Cavaliero Cobweb to scratch; I must to the
Barbers Monsieur, for me thinks I am marvaillous hairy about the face, and I am
such a Tender ass if my hair does but tickle me I must scratch


What will thou hear some music my sweet love?


I have a reasonable good ear in music, let us hear the Tongue and the bones.


Or say sweet love what thou desire to eat?


Truly a peck of provender, I could maunch your good dry Oats, me thinks I
have a great desire to a bottle of hay, good hay, sweet hay has no fellow


I have a ventrous Fairy
That shall seek the Squirils hoard
And fetch the new Nuts

I had rather have a handful or two of dried pease. But I pray let none of
your people stir me, I have an exposition of sleep come upon me


Sleep thou and I will wind the in my arms
Fairies begone and be allwaies away
So does the wood bind the sweet Honisuckle
Gently entwist, the female Ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the Elm
O how I love thee? How I dote on thee?

Welcome good Pug.
See thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now do I begin to pity
For meeting her of late behind the wood
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool
I did upbraid her and fall out with her,
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With Coronet of fresh and Fragrant flowers,
And that same Dew which some time on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearl;
I stood now within the pretty flouriers eyes
Like tears that did there own disgrace bewaise
And she in mild terms begd my patience
I then did ask of her her Changeling child
Which straight she gave me and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in Fairy land.
And now I have the boy I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes
And gentle Pug take this transformed Scalpe
From off the head of this Athenian swain
That he awaking may return to Athens
and think no more of this nights accidents
But as the sierce vexation of a dream
But first I will release my fairy Queen.
Be thou as thou was wont to be
See thou as thou was wont to see,
Dians bud or Cupids Flower
Has such force and blessed power.
Now my Titania wake you my sweet Queen

My Oberon what visions have I seen
Me thought I was inamored of an ass.

There lies your love.


How came these things to pass
Oh how mine eyes do loath this visage now.

Silence a while. Pug take thou off his head


When thou awakes with thine own fools eyes peep.


When my cue comes call me, and I will answer, my next is most fair Pyramus
hei ho. Peter Quince, Flute the bellows mender? Snout the Tinker? Starveling?
Gods my life stolen hence and left me asleep, I have had a most rare vision, I
had a dream past the wit of man to say what dream it was. Man is but an Ass
if he go about to expound this dream, me thought I was there is no man can tell
what me thought I was, and me thought I had, but a man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what me thought I had, the eye of man has not heard, the
ear of man has not seen, man's hand is not able to cast, his tongue to
conceive, not his heart report what my dream, was. I will get Peter Quince to
write a Ballad of this dream, it shall be called Bottomes dream because it has
no Bottom and I will sing it in the later end of the Play before the Duke,
peradventure to make, it the more gracious I will sing it at her death.


Have you sent to Bottoms house? is he come yet?


He cannot be heard of, out of doubt he is transported.


If he come not then the play is marrd, it goes not forward does it?


It is not possible, you have not a man in all Athent able to discharge Pyramus
but he


Noe: He has simply the best wit of any handycrafts man in Athens.


Yea and the best person too, and he is a very Paramour for a sweet voice.


You must say Paragon, a Paramour is God bless us a thing of naught.


Masters, the Duke is now coming from being married at the Temple, oh if our
sport had gone forward, we had all been made men


O sweet Bully Bottom, thou have lost six pence a day during his life, he
could not have escaped six pence a day, and the Duke had not given him sixpence
a day for playing Pyramus I Will be hanged, he would have deserved sixpence a day
in Pyramus or nothing


Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?


Bottom! O most courageous day! oh most hapy hour*


Masters I am to discourse wonders, but ask me not what, for if I tell you I
am no true Athenian, I will tell you every thing as it fell out


Let us hear sweet Bottom.


Not a word of me, all that I will tell you is that the Duke has dined, get
your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new Ribbands to your Pumps,
meet presently in the Palace every man look over his part for the short and
the long is, our play is preferred, in any case let Thisby have clean linen:
and let not him that plays the Lion pare his Nails for they shall hang out
for the Lions claws, and most dear actors eat no Onions nor Garlic, for we
are to utter sweet breath and doubt not to hear them say it is a sweet Comedy.
No more words away: go away


May all things prove propitious to this match
And heavens power down whole showers of joy to wait
Within your Royal walks your Board, your bed

Thanks kind Egaeus, but what pleasant maskes
What dances have we now to wear away
This long age of three hours which yet we have
To spend ere bed time?

And't please your grace, there is a scene
Tedious yet brief to be presented of
The love of Pyramus and Thisbe
Mirth very Tragical

Merry and Tragical? tedious and brief. That is hot Ice, and wondrous Strange
snow? how shall we find a concord in this discord


A play there is my Lord, some ten words long
Which is as brief as I have known a play,
But by ten words my Lord it is too long
Which makes it tedious, For in all the play
There Is not one word apt, one player fitted;
And Tragical my noble Lord it is
For Pyramus therein does skill himself
Which when I saw rehearst I must confess
Made my eyes water but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed

What are they that do play it?


Hard handed men that work in Athens here
Which never labored in their minds till now
And now have toyled their unbreathed memories
With this same play against your Nuptials

And we will hear it, let them approach.


If we offend it is with our good will.
That you should think we come not to offend
But with good will, To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then, we come but in despite,
We do not come as minding to content you
Our true intent is. All for your delight
We are not here. That you should here repent you
The actors are at hand, And by their show
You shall know all that you are like to know.

This fellow does not stand upon points.


He has read his prologue like a Rough Colt, he knows not the Stop. A good
moral my Lord. It is not enough to speak, but to speak true


Indeed he has played on his Prologue like a Child on the recorder, a sound but
^ot in government


His speech was like a tangled chain nothing impaired but all disordered. Who
is the next


Gentels perchance you wonder at this show;
But wonder on till truth does make all things plain:
This man is Pyramus if you would know;
This beauteous Lady Thisbe is certain.
This man with Lime and Rough-cast does present
Wall the vile Wall which did these lovers sunder,
And through Walls chink (poor souls) they are content
To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man with Lantern Dog, and bush of Thorn
Presents Moonshine; for if you will know,
By Moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus Tomb, there there to woe.
This Grisly beast (which Lion height by name)
The trusty Thisbe coming first by night
Did scare away, or rather did affright,
And as she sled her mantle she did fall,
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain;
Anon comes Pyramus sweet youth and tall,
And finds his gentle Thisbie's mantle slain,
Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade
He bravely broach't his bloody boiling breast,
And Thisbe tarrying in Mulberry shade
His Dagger drew and dyed. For all the rest
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and Lovers twain
At large discourse, while here they do remain.

I wonder if the Lion be to speak?


No wonder my Lord, one Lion may, when many Asses do.


In this same interlude it does befall
That I one Snug (by name present a wall,
And such a wall as I would have you think
As had in it a cr^nned hole or chink,
through which the Lovers Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often very secretly.
This loame, this rough-cast, and this stone does show
that I am that same wall the truth is so,
And this the Cranny is right and sinister,
through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

Would you desire lime and hair to speak better.


It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse my Lord.


Pyramus draws near the wall, Silence --


O Grim looked night! O night with hue so black!
O night which ever art when day is not.
O night, O night, alack, alack, alack
I fear my Thisbie's promise is forgot;
And thou O wall, thou sweet and lovely wall,
that stands between her fathers ground and mine,
Thou Wall, O Wall, O sweet and lovely Wall
Show me thy Chink to blink through with mine eyes.
Thanks Courteous Wall; Jove shield thee well for this.
But what see I? No Thisby do I see.
O witched Wall through whom I see no bliss:
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me.

The Wall me thinks being sensible should curse again.


No in truth Sir he should not, Deceiving me Is Thisbies Cue, she is to enter,
and I am to spy her through the Wall, you shall see it will fall

Pat as I told you; yonder she comes.


O Wall full often have thou heard my moanes
For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My Cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
Thy stones with Lime and Hair knit up in thee.

I hear a voice, Now will I to the Chink
To spy if I can see my Thisbies face. Thisby.

My love, thou art my love I think.


Think what thou will I am thy lovers Grace,
And like Limander am I trusty still.

And I like Helen till the fates me kill.


Not Thafalus to Procrus was so true.


As Shalafus to Procrus I to you.


O kiss me through the hole of this vile Wall.


I kiss the Wall hole, not your lips at all.


Will thou at Ninnies tomb meet me straight way?


Tide life ride death I Will come without delay.


Thus have I Wall my part discharged so.


Now is the Moral down between the two neighbors.


No remedy my Lord when Walls are so wilful.


This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.


The best in this kind are but shaddows, and the worst no worse, if
imagination amend them


It must be your imagination then, not theirs.


If we imagine no worse of them then they of themselves, they may pass for
excellent men. Here comes two noble Beasts in, a Man and a Lion


You Ladies, you whose gehtle hearts do fear
the monstrous Mouse that creeps on floor;
May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
When Lion rough in wildest rage does roar.
Then know that I one Snug the Joyner am,
A Lion fell, nor else no Lions damme,
For if I should as Lion come in strife
Into this place, it were pity of my life.

A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.


The very best at a beast my Lord that ever I saw.


This Lion is a very Fox for his valor.


True, and a Goose for his discretion.


Not so my Lord, for his valor cannot carry his discretion, and the Fox
carries the Goose


His discretion I am sure cannot carry his valor, for the Goose carries not
the Fox. It is well, leave it to his discretion


This Lantern does the horned Moon present.


He should have worn the horns on his head.


He is no Crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.


This Lantern does the horned Moon present; my self the man ith Moon does
seeem to be


This is the grearest error of all the rest, the man should be put in the
Lantern, how is he else the man in the Moon


He dares not come in there for the Candle, for you see it is already in snuff.


I am weary of this moon, would he would change,


It appears by his small light of Discretion that he is in the Waine: but yet
in courtesy in all reason we must stay the time


Proceed Moon?


All that I have to say is, to tell you that the Lantern is the Moon; I the
man in the Moon, this thorne-Bush my bush, and this Dog my Dog


Why, all these should be in the Lantern, for they are in the Moon. But
silence, here comes Thisbe


This is old Ninnies tomb: where is my love.


Oh --


Well roared Lion.


Well run Thisby.


Well shone Moon. Truly the moon shines with a good grace.


Well mouz'd Lion


And then came Pyramus


And so the Lion vanished


Sweet moon I thank thee for thy sunny beams
I thank the moon for shining now so bright
For by thy gracious golden glittering Streams
I trust to taste of truest Thisbes sight
But stay: O spite! but mark poor knight
What dreadful dole is here?
Eyes do you see! How can it be!
O dainty Duke! O dear!
Thy mantell good; what stained with blood
Approach you furies fell
O Fates come come, cut thread and thrum
Quail, crush, conclude and quell.

This passion and the death of a dear friend would go near to make a man look
sad


Beshrew my heart but I pity the man


O wherefore nature did thou Lions stame?
Since Lion wild has here defloured my dear
Which is, no no, Which was the fairest Dame
That livd that loved that liked that looked with cheer
Come tears confound, out sword and wound
The pap of Pyramus
I that left pap where heart does hap
Thus eye I thus thus thus
Now am I dead, now am I fled, my soul is in the sky
Tongue loose thy light moon take thy flight
Now dye dye dye dye dye

No dye but am ace for him for he is but one


Less then an ace man for he is dead he is nothing


With the help of a Surgeon he might yet recover and prove an Ass.


How chance moonshine is gone before.


She finds him by starlight
Here She comes and her passion ends the play

Me thinks she should not use a long one, for such a Pyramus I hope she will be
brief


A Moth will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe is the better.


She has spyed him already with those sweet eyes.


And thus she means. Videlicet.


Asleep my love? What dead my dove?
O Pyramus arise,
Speak, Speak. Quite dumb? Dead, dead? a tomb
Must cover thy sweet eyes.
These lilly lips, this cherry nose.
These yellow Cowslip cheeks
are gone, are gone, lovers make moan,
His eyes were as green as leeks.
O Sisters three, come come to me
with hands as pale as milk,
lay them in gore, since you have shore
with sheares, his thread of silk.
Tongue not a word; Come trusty Sword,
Come blade my breast imbrue,
And farewell friends, thus Thisbe ends.
Adieu Adieu Adieu.

Moonshine and lion are left to bury the Dead.


I and Wall too.


No I assure you, the wall is down that parted their Fathers. Will it please
you to see the Epilogue, or to hear a Burgo-mask dance between two of our
company


No Epilogue pray you, for your play needs no excuse, never excuse. For when
the Players are all Dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry if he that writ
it had played Pyramus, and hung himself in Thisbies Garter, it had been a fine
Tragedy, and so it is truly, and very notably discharged; but come, your
Burgo-mask, let your Epilogue alone.


If you please to repair to our Shops aforementioned, you may be furnished
with all Plays that were ever yet Printed


