Where in the name of Priscian have thou been, thou sanguine syring-man?


Oh this wicked world! I Will tell you Sir the story: This cap you see (pointing
to his head) covers a cruel wound. I yesternight met with a crew of those, who
talk of heaven, and of a place of torment, to whom when I began to preach our
Doctrine, one of the company with a pewter pot struck me upon the head with all
his might


Alas poor Dose, there is no such strong necessity for to divulge our Doctrine
in all companies


That men should be such fools, to pinnion their own arms, tie their own legs,
and propose such strange nothings to themselves, on purpose for to keep
themselves in awe. When would they but perceive their happiness, both this
world and the next is solely theirs; nor can they lose their way although they
would


No more of this at present (my dear Dose) thou know, though by our only
sacred Laws, every man's wife must be at his friends use, yet Pigwidgin the
Tailor thwarts our custom; he is content to rant with other women, but to
expose his own Spouse he denies; now have I plotted for to circumvent him: Thou
know we meet anon at Sychophantios, where while (as is our use) we drink and
roar, step thou home and bring thence some sleepy potion, which I Will infuse
into his cup: so while he steeps, I Will use his wife before him, 'twill be rare
sport


With all my heart, it is a work meritorious: we must sometimes save souls
against their wills! Oh here are all the Gang. --


How now Pan, where have thou been my dear Pandorses.


My much admired Master, I am but now come from my sad employment, I am so
wearied and tired with ranting it, that I am not my self, so consequently
yours


Why, what have done for our infernal grace? prithee report, do they increase
and multiply


Most reverend Devil, I have obtained in your behalf the choice of all the
Town, as Citizens wives, and others that will be led away, and there improved
much


I must confess my most obsequious Ningle, thou have behaved thy self and our
affairs with admirable diligence, and for thy pains, thou shall obtain my
favor for thy gains


Pray Sir your approbation.


I have surveyed the Universe, as France, Spain, and Italy, yet cannot parallel
the Ranters of this our English Climate; I Have blinded them with pleasures of
this world, by putting on a mask of Religion to make it no sin, that makes my
proselites run headlong down to the infernal lake, where Cerberus transports
them to their supposed joy, where yet at last, into infernal flames at length
they are cast


A good reward for such servants.


But prithee Pan, let me see how they improve, let us have one merry Jig before
we depart


Please you great Sir you shall.


Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,


Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Joviall Ranters.


Let fearful souls refuse their bowls,
And tremble for to tipple:

Let moon-men fear to domineere,
And halt before a Cripple.

Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Joviall Ranters.

No hell we dread when we are dead,
No Gorgon nor no Fury:

And while we live, we will drink and --
In spite of Judge or Jury.

Come on my Boys, receive your joys,
And take your fill of pleasure,

Shoot for shoot, away let us doo'r,
But we must have our measure.

All lie down, as in a swovvn,
to have a pleasing Vision.

And then rise with bared thighs,
Who'd fear such sweet incision?

About, about, ye Joviall rout,
Dance antic like Hob-gobblins;

Drink and roar, and swear and whore,
But yet no brawls or squoblings.

Come away, make no delay, of mirth we are no scanters,
Dance and sing all in a Ring, for we are Joviall Ranters.

How like you these mad pranks of these our Joviall Crew?


Most exquisitely well performed, I have not known the like, let them go on,
and for their hire, I will revvard them with eternal fire


What means this horrid noise? sure it is some dire presage of these our horrid
actions, yet I hope my dear Associates, this is but the praeludium to our
mirth, let us now to Sychophantios


Where we will drink svveet Wine and strong Tobacco, till we become
immortal, there is Philosophy for you


Away.
Black night put on thy thickest mists, and try
For to abscond us from Joves piercing eye.

Gossip, if I am not on fire to be acquainted with some of this new Sect, may
I want silver-lace for my next petticoat, and be enjoined not to vvear so much
as a Buckinghamshire edging upon my smocks


And so have I Mrs. Idlesby, without doubt they are a rare Society, lead
heavenly lives, nothing but acting good for one another, drinking love-healths,
and amorous departments


They are the only people: O what a put^e^ our Divines do keep for honesty,
honor, and virtuous life! not to make Minotaurs of our gentle husbands; no
mirth, no due refreshment must be had, save what our impotent husbands will
allow: I am resolved to be of their Religion, and go to heaven the nearest
way


A match, then we will be Convertites together: this very day the prime of all
the gang, the chief'st Theologists, and worthiest fisters of all that zealous
Tribe are met together at Sychophantios house, the lime-hound Tavern, shall we
go to 'em


With all my heart, Iovve my life unto thee for the motion, let us away.


The breeches are my own, henceforth I Will rant.


No way but this to be predominant.


Drawer (he knocks) where is your Master Sirrah?


At hand quoth pick-purse.


Fill me all the empty vessels in the house, I Will except none, with pure and
sparkling Racy


Chamber-pots and all Sir?


Out Rogue, jeer me!


Oh, oh, oh!


What Is the matter Noble Gentlemen?


This Rogue your servant here --


Sir, I am much obliged unto your love, that you would deign to castigate him;
what wine wilt please this honored company to have brought in, and eke what
quantity


'Twould be too tedious and too troublesome, to drag a But of right Canary
hither, fill us some twenty Gallons of rich Sack, let lights adorn the room in
every angle, a pound of right Varina, and a gross of shining pipes, fit for a
females touth


Twenty Flaggons -- 'twill not amount to thimble fulls a piece, thirty will
serve to give the onset with

A little wine, will make's a little rant,
But seas of Sack will not suffice us scant,
when we would reach the highest pitch of mirth.

Your humble servant, the wine proposed shall wait you presently.


Kiss close, kiss close my hearts, each suck Nepenthe from his females lips,
until our Nectar do approach


Alll joys wait on this joviall company, this in obedience to your just
commands


Rare Sychophantio, thou art the best Steward to Venus that ever filled quart pot.


Ha! ha! ha! Steward to Bacchus you mean Asinego, but Wine and Venery are so
near allied, 'twas but a slight mistake: now drink like Dutchmen (while we sing
Paeans to the plump cheek'd god) let us tipple till we have swallowed down their
Charter, that for the future, when men quaffe profoundly, they may be said to
drink like us: Here Mrs. Pigwidgin, to our next procreation


Hum, hum, hum!


A health to Mrs. Wriggle, as second to our Master; I propose it.


I thank you fellow creatures, I Will serve either of you soul and body.


Lovely Mrs. All-prate, in this I celebrate the creatures health, who now is
plowing on the angry main, whose saddle I supply, he will thank me for it. --

Mrs. All-prate. He were a devil else: Here Is to thee dear Violentus, this will
enable thee against next performance, you were faultringly feeble in the last

Mrs. Crave drink. Here Is old drinking to me, have I a dogs face that I Am so
neglected


Better this Town were buried in the Sea: here dear Mrs. Crave-dri. my best
endeavors ever wait upon you

Mrs. All-prate. Here sweet Mr. Dose: Ha! where is Mr. Dose.

Apostatus Perhaps gone to evacuate: see he is come.


I am the rar'st Ranter
Of all the whole crew Boys,
And he that denies it,
I Will prove him a Jew Boys,
For roaring; and whoring,
You know I speak true Boys.

Fit to be Tutor to a Tribe: here fellow creature, here is a whole slash to thee.


I Will pledge thee, were to him they call old Rug:


Put off your hats Gentlemen.


The Devill's an Ass like thee, and not worth drinking to: strike high ye
sons of Orpheus and Arion


A Hall, a Hall:


What power may us daunt,
While we sing roar and rant,
A fig for the talkative rabble.

We know what we do,
And to heaven we will go
Spite of the Watch, and the Constable.

There Is but one Religion,
The Turk with his Pidgeon,
No man shall be punished for's Vices;

All those that deny
With us to comply
Are Caterpillars and Cockatrices.

What more can be craved,
We all shall be saved
Though our lives are never so vicious.

What ever we act
It Is an heavenly fact,
And for our salvation auspicious.

Come some man or other,
And make me a mother,

Let no man fear for to board me:


Come as many as will,
I give 'em their fill,
And thank 'em for that they afford me.

Come any strong Rogue
That would fain disimbogue,
Let Us mingle, and try who is the strongest,

I fain would comply
With him that dare vye
To stand to his tackling the longest.

Come my brethren of the Base Violl, some whim, some air, some catch. Fiddler
The best and newest Sir in Town

Now let us stay, and never knock off till the envious day
Shall disturb us.
No Constables staff, must hinder our quaffe,
It Is the reckoning alone that can curb us.
Let Us mingle in mirth, and drink till our Noses
Are brighter then Berry, and redder then Roses,
He only can rant whom Canary disposes.
This must go round, do off your hats till the pavement be crowned With your
Beavers

A red-coated-face frights the Sergeant and his Mace, And the Constable
trembles to shivers

Then in state march your faces like some of the Quorum,
When the whores do fall down, and the Vulgar adore 'um,
And their Noses like link-boys run shining before 'um.
Call, call aloud, and never cease till the pots together crowd In Battalia;

Let our tippling make known, we came from the Town,
By the vulgar y^leped Westphalia.
Let the Bar-boy go sleep, and the Drawers leave roaring,
Our looks shall account for them and a moring,
When such pimples that rises shall have a quart scoring.

Excellent! did this Minerva take flight from John Tailors, or Martin Parkers
brain


From neitheir Sir, an utter Barester fathers 'em, which makes some laugh, that
the fool should be so ambitious to rock the Cradle


Sweet Mrs. All prate, I grow proud beneath the Navell, and must needs crave
your aid with an etc


Sir, I am none of your Jigging girls, who will play with any babble, I am
sufficiently acquainted with the flatulency of your Nerve


Mum, mum.


Here Is a health to all our friends in Kent, let her pledge me that dares make
the Beast with two backs before the whole Society


By all the flesh on my back, a cordial motion, the work is pious we attempt,
'twill add to the audacity of our Brethren


Rare rare, here dearest fellow creatures, I mean you that walk in Adonis
Gardens to gather flowers once a month, more Wine there


I come Sir, the Devil choke ye, ye rude Rogues, I must think of some way to
be revenged for my broken pate


Enter Sychophantio.

Honored Gentlemen; here are two handsome Females without, that desire
admittance into your company


Let 'em come in, let 'em come in, I know the parties very well.


Conduct 'em to us; two handsome women say thou?


Some of our own Society sure.


Or else desire to be.
The Wine dies upon our hands.

You shall find it lively enough anon Sir, to the lulling of all your sickly
senses


I shall observe it strictly Sir: excellent opportunity; I'^e be revenged on all
for one man's folly

Assist me Bachus in this queint Vagary,

As thou expect'st the sale of thy Canary.


Welcome ye lovely pair: your amiable aspects do proclaim you come as friends
for to associate us; treachery cannot lurk under such looks, where Cupid and
the Graces love to lodge


Excellent creatures! Oh my bodkin troubles me.


They rival Venus, mother Dione, Juno her self, or fair Astioche.


These faces are unknown to me, yet welcome fellow creatures.

Idlesby, Know holy crew, the fame of your fair lives, having once reached my
ears, set me a longing to be made one of your blessed Society, more then when I
was big with my Son Toby, and needs must eat a piece of roasted Bacon: be
pleased to name me one of your Associates, and I dare challenge Superiority
above an Eastern Queen


She speaks my thoughts, and my desires.


They Have certified enough, what need prolixity?


Drink to the two beauties, and then imitate them with members of our bodies.


Drink deep my hearts for joy of this new Union.


And let the stream of the strong Indian weed involve us as we sit in the clouds.


So this was punctually performed: this (my pair of Beauties) is the first
graduall step to your uniting; come fellow creatures now unto our Ceremonies

The Song.


Round round all in a ring,
Fellow Creatures let us sing:
Here are two that come to be
Annexed to our Society:

By Pluto's Crown, Proserpines hair,


Cerberus yell, Alecto's chair,


By Epicurus happy life,


And Messalina, Claudius wife;


By Venus Gloves, and Lais paint,


By Iezabel our chiefest Saint:


By Goats desires, and Monkies heat,


Spanish flies and stirring meat,


By the vigor of an horse,


By all things of strength and force,


By Alcides back of steel,


By Jove's escapes, Omphales wheel,


We adopt these happy pair,
Of our Liberties to share:

Arise, arise, blessed souls, and know,
Now you may rant, cum privelegio.

Now having finished this pious work, let us drink deep healths unto the happy
solace, we of the shirt may find with these two Sisters


What ho! some Wine and more Tobacco there.


Here Gentlemen, now Rhamnusia aid me in my revenge, vovvd for my broken
scull, that which Dose gave me for to spice Pigwidgins cup, I Have mix amongst
all this wine -- ha -- those two faces I have seen e're now in milder
company: he spies Idlesby and Doe-little! Ostrange, they two turned Ranters!
I Will presently acquaint their husbands vvith't

Drink deep my Rogues until you fall asleep,

A guard I Will fetch, your persons safe to keep.


Me thinks vv'are dull, quite lost unto our liquor: this quart I Will svuallovv:
now fair Mrs. Idlesby and Doe-little, to those dulced joys we shall make ours
the time we mingle limbs


It Is almost midnight -- come, we lose time.


I wonder Pigwidgin holds up so long, art sure Spolario gave it him?


O doubt it not, there is plummets hangs upon my eyelids, I hardly can keep
open the casements


Goodnight Brethren of the ranting humor, I must needs snore a while:

Enter Spolario with the Constable, and the Watch.


Not a word to my Master --


Never fear it, the State shall give thee thanks for this discovery: I charge
you my friends in the Kings Name, cry mercy in the Name of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, to endeavor to awake these persons as well by kicking as
pinching, and other laudable means, according to the Statute

1. Watchman: Sir it is in vain, they have drunk themselves dead, or else (as
the wise man says) are dead drunk


Noble Mr. Constable, What Is the matter here?


Matter quoth you? Sir you keep a disordered house; the State shall know it:
for ought I know these men and women here have drunk their lives away


I Will assure you Sir they had not above a pottle of Sack amongst 'em, I wonder
at the accident


Call me a hackney vessel hither, I Will have them (drunk or dead as they are) to
Finsbury, 'twill be a piece of extraordinary justice: every man take one of
these on his back (pay your selves for your portage with what you find in their
pockets) lay them in seemly ranks within the coach, and guard them hence to
Finsbury

2. Watchman. It shall be done Sir.


The Other quort my hearts; this health deserves, the highest celebration. What
all asleep! drunk as I live. Sycophantio has put a trick upon us


What want you Sir?


Want say thou? prithee what place is this? where is Sycophantio?


This, my friend, is Finsbury, a receptacle of thieves, debtors, and drunkards:
I am the Keeper of the place


Here Is a miracle: prithee how came we here?


A coach Sir brought you hither, and a Constable.


So ho, so ho, so ho! He wakes the rest


Sweet sister, I am not now disposed for dalliance; another time I Will doubly do
my duty


What ho! They have drank Laethe sure, some Poppey or Mandragora: We Are all
undone: A Constable and his Watch (like saucy Devils) have given us
transportation to this Goal, we know not when nor how


Mercy on me; where are are we now?


Then fill more wine, it makes us divine;
Here Is a health to Thomas the Tinker.
Ha! What stable's this?

O Mrs. Doe-little! we are all undone.


Peace fool; are we not all Ranters? That Spolario has spoiled us all.


You should have followed my advice, and done the task I did prescribe your
self


O Pigwidgin, what will become of us!


What are you?


As you are, Ranters.


Ranters? Byas, yes Ranters, our women are all in common.

We drink quite drunk together, share our Oaths,
If one man's cloak be rent, all tear their Clothes.

If you are one with us, you will subscribe unto these several Articles.


Good Sir let us hear 'em, we are pliant boys.


Imprimis, That you believe you are the best servants to heaven, when you roar
lowdest, drink deepest, swear profoundest, whore the oftnest, swear the
execrablest, and rant the highest. Byas. very good


Item, That you acknowledge your selves obliged to prostrate each man his wife
to the use of his fellow creature, and are so far from loathing the form of the
act, that you would renounce and disclaim her, in case she deny a compliance.
Item, That you have taken an Oath to Bacchus (having solemnly sworn over a
quart of Canary) to be drunk at least five times a week, and to use your utmost
endeavors to convert all out of the faith, to our manner of life and worship


All this we were long since sworn to, and to give you full satisfaction in
that point, the females here of your Society must go along with us for
satisfaction


I hope Wriggle thou will not go along with these.


Oh husband 'twere a sin for to deny 'em, we will be a while in private with our
new Brethren


Sirs, though our Laws allow an equal share to all of our Society with their
women, we first must be assured you are of us


No more dispute, they must along.


Must, they shall not Sir.


We Citizens are exposed to lead strange lives,
When we are forced to fight for our own wives.
They fall together by the ears, the Ranters are soundly beaten; and their
women carried off.


Dear Mr. Clink, you have extremely obliged our gratitudes: good Sir, what have
you done with the other gang


Ene clapped 'um altogether in one room; they are strange fellows, and may be
well called Ranters; they have unclothed themselves unto their shirts, and
their apparel they have laid to gage for strong drink and Tobacco: they drink
healths, and swear and roar, as if they felt no cold, each with a pair of irons
on his heels


You use our fellow creatures too severely, but it is not in our powers to help
the matter: let us entreat you dearest Sisters all, to follow Mr. Clink to the
next room; we will begin with these two Ladies first, and so with all of you by
turns


Come Ladies

To'ther go naked for their pleasures, you

Shall for my profit be as naked too.


Now thou vile strumpet, do thou know this face?


My husband! Oh I am undone.


Impudent whore, is this your zeal to goodness, to journey every morn e're six
a clock unto S. Antholins to hear a Lecture, with a great Bible of Geneva
print; your Table Book too, to take Sermon notes


Take heed Sir what you do, I am a Ranter.


Yes whore, I find thou art.
I can rant too for a need,
These are but fillips, I should make thee bleed.

Oh, oh! dear husband.


This punishment is too poor for their deserts: you huswife I Will not beat, or
spurn, I will do more then that: these clothes I gave you, come uncase, uncase


You minion must participate her fate.


For heavens sake husband pardon me.


Thou art beyond the bounds of absolution.


Ene go together, these would comber you: now you are fitter to dance Lavaltoes.


Can you be so hard hearted?


Yes I Will assure you, no thou art a right Ranter.


Here I for ever take my leave of thee: nay, no whining now: see here are all
your fellow-Caco-Oxmons --


Go, go, mingle your selves amongst 'em, it is but in vain to tire me with
Petitions

I Will get me a new Mate, but I Will beware whom I wed for thy sake, whom I durst
once have sworn to be most virtuous

Enter Apostatus, Violentus, Asinego, Dose, Robustio, Minks, Fulsome, and all
the She-Ranters in their shirts and smocks, a Beadle with a whip, and other
Officers


March faster Gentlemen Ranters, march faster; I have others that wait to be
dispatched as well as you


O Apostatus, what shall we do!


Do? be as thou art in show, a man, and bear affliction patiently.


Oh Sir, but when affliction comes like a fury, with a Whip in her hand! Oh
it is a sore trial; would I had never learned the Art of Ranting


Here Sir, take this She-Ranter in amongst the rest.


And this too, she is one of the Society, though of a younger date.


The more the merrier, I am resolved to Rant it to the last.


Farewell sweet Idlesby; now we must part,


Lash my wife well prithee, I Will pay thee for it.


Written by S. S. Gent.

Licensed and Published according to Order:


