Exiled Orestes is returned, though late,
His Royal Fathers blood to expiate:
That Blood from which War and the bold sword shrunk
Yet was by Treason, and the cold Ax drunk.
Safe is he entered, but yet unrevea'ld,
By Night and darker policy concealed.
Electra here a Generous Defyer,
In vain to comfort wooed by the kind Quire,
Chides Chrysotheame a white-liver'd Complyer:
Who was with Offering by her Mother sent
To bribe the dead, and Seape the punishment.
She intercepts the gifts, the Oils she spills,
And with a smoking Curse her Censer fills.
The Cannon's turn, and this revolting prayer,
Went forth a Treasure, but returns a snare.
But Clytemnestra pleads the fact was Just,
The Bill was Murder, where the Judge was Lust.
Yet though the out-faced Noon she down may beat,
The Dark brings Vision, and the Silence threat,
Lashed by pale dreams, the Hobs of night, she runs
To flattering Humiliations.
Thinking those angry Beadles to disarm,
With strumpet Incense and Religious charm.
But hypocritical Devotions dress,
A Pageant safety, and a Mock of peace:
For scarce her prayers are cooled and downward bending
When their return is at the door attending.
A Post in neat Romance Orestes slayes,
Secures the field, and so the field betrays.
Now sad Electra at the dismal news
Dissolves, and scatters into pious Dews.
The Quire Companions of her grief she slights,
Nor in her Sisters joyful words delights.
Who sees large offerings at the Sepulcher,
And thence her Brothers hand does right infer.
Built on much reason: but we less set by
Weak-grounded truth, then a bold hearsay ly^
Hence raging grief into hard valor knits,
(For both are elevate beyond our wits)
Her Sister she invites to mutual Aid,
With hands combined the Traitor to invade,
And is repulsed, yet she resolves alone
To execute her resolution.
Those who Compound led captive by tame Ease,
Seldom on dangerous Honor dare to Seize.
Poor loyalty, how low now art thou laid
By Enemies destroyed, by friends betrayed!
What valiant wisdom will appear at once,
To break thy foes, and heal thy Factions?
Orestes is at door; his Urn he shows,
Meets with Electra and confirms her woes.
The dear Imposture she must see and hold,
And to her Brother all her cares unfold.
In doleful accents her sweet passions sound,
Which in a precious deluge straight are drowned.
The happy witness of those pious throws.
Cannot forbear his person to disclose.
Their Joys swell high, but at a quick surprise,
First Clytemnestra, and then Egist dy's.
Thus Loyal sorrow in high triumph ends,
While rebel Joy Eternal Black attends.

SOn of great Agamemnon, he who late
Led the Greek host against the Trojan State;
Now may thine eyes their wished objects read:
This is old Argos you still longed to tread.
Yon grove is horn-mad Inachi's abode:
And this, Orestes,
Wolf-Court has named: But on the left her fanes
The proud Heraeum's spiring tops advance:
Mycens the wealthy here her Treasures show's,
this the Pelopeian house,
Whence I thee, as thy Father fresh was slain,
From thy dear sisters sweet embraces taken
Rescued and saved, and to this bigness bred
Avenger of thy Royal Fathers head.
Now then, Orestes, and thou dearest friend
Pylade, dispatch we that that we intend.
For birds with chirping Mattins call from bed
The woken Suns already rising head,
And sable night of all her stars is rid:
Wherefore e're any out of doors shall stir,
Confer your thoughts. No time now to demur,
But forward action ripened is to height.

Dearest of my attendants, now I see it
How kind thou art to us it plain appears,
For as some mettel'd steed, though struck in years,
In hottest service naught of heart lets go,
But stands with ear erect; you even so
Both spur us on, and march your self i'ch front:
I^'e tell you my resolve, attend you on it:
And if ought unadvised escape, amend.
When I the Pythian curtain did attend
Consulting how my Fathers murder, I
On the executioners might satisfy,
Phoebus this answer gave, mark the reply:
Without or buckler or an armies guard
By stealth procure the murders just reward,
Since then the holy voice directs us thus,
As first occasion serv's, get in this house,
And mark what e're is done, and when you know,
Make us acquainted how all actions go:
For they will never spy nor once suspect your show,
With age disguised, long absence, and this hiew:
And make your tale this wise; A Forreiner
Of Phoce, sent by noble Phanot there,
(For he and they in nearest league combine)
You come to tell (thereto a deep oath join)
How that Orestes came t'untimely end
As in the Pythian matches they contend,
Struck from the hurrying eoach: This story pass.
Mean while my Fathers tomb in the first place
(As was appointed then) with locks new shorn,
And hallowed liquours we forth with adorn:
Then we return, and carrying in our hands
The pot which midst the thicket you know stands
To hide the tale, the sweet news you have se'd
We Will bring them word of, how that I am dead;
My body in the funeral pile calcined,
To the few ashes in this urn confined:
For what great harm if but reported slain,
In truth I live, and great renown obtain.
I Am of the mind no words that gain are naught:
Thus have I often seen
I the empty coffin of a false report,
Yet safe come home and double honored for 't;
So trust I from this fame alive to rise,
Like a bright star upon my enemies.
O Country soil and Greeces guardian powers,
Send me a blessed journey to these Towers;
And you my Fathers Hall, for you I come
To expiate you, led by heavenly doom:
Nor send me with disgrace out of these ports,
But Lord of wealth, but Founder of great Courts.
Well, I have done: but you, grave Sir, beware
To what our Counsel charged upon your care:
And we away, It Is time, for alway's this
Grand Over-seer of all actions is.

Ay me, unhappy me!


Methinks within door, child, I seemd to hear
One of the maidens keep a groaning there.

It Is poor Electra, is 't not, prithee fain
I Would stay a while, and hear the plaint again.

By no means, naught before Phoebus advice
Assay to do: Thence take our Action rise.
Go, pour your offerings on your Fathers tomb,
For Triumph hence, and might for Service come:


Nurses privy to my care,
You my Dirges witness best,
You how I ply my bruised breast,
When the gloomy Shade, is ceast;
But my Night groans ring aloof,
In the sad Courts wicked roof,
While I my poor Father mean,
Whom in Barbarous Region
Bloody Mars had let alone,

Egist, as strong Swains lie at
A sturdy Oak to fell down flat,
His head with bloody Pol-ax cleave:
Nor any but I at this grieve
That thou, Father, thus should come
To a sad unworthy doom.
But moan I will and cry,
While I the glittering stars espy,
While I the day discover
My plaint I Will nere give over,
But as a robbed Nightingall
Will my sorrows tune, and all
Shall hear my moan before this gate;
O Pluto's and Proserpines state!
O Mercury and curse that sure is!
O stern god-begotten Fury's!
You Crowners of the murdered, hear
You Watchers of the Adulterer!
Come ye, help ye, venge ye all
Our Fathers fall:
And my brother home me call.
My self no longer can weigh down
My overbearing moan.

1 Child, Electra, of a mother
2 Unlucky'st of all other
3 Why always thus dripping away
4 In tears that can find no allay,
5 For Agamemnon long since slain
6 By the ungodly wily Quain,
7 And betrayed by wicked train.
8 O that he who did this contrive
9 (If I may say it) may he nere thrive!

1 Issues of noble parentage,
2 You come my sorrow to assuage,
3 I see and know it, nor deceive
4 You me, yet never by your leave
5 Will I surcease with sobbing cries
6 To mourn my Fathers obsequies:
7 Wherefore sweet Damsels ever kind,
8 Let me this favor from you find,
9 Let me alone,
10 Always, alack, alack to groan.

1 Why from deaths Catholic Mere you will never
2 Though most you moan, deliver
3 Your Father back: or cry, or pray,
4 You only cast your self away:
5 While you improve and give more weight
6 To sorrows load, which else were light;
7 Nor can release come by 't
8 From the sad pressure of your woe:
9 Why long you then your self to undo.

1 Foolish they who in silence sheath
2 Their parents brought to wretched death.
3 But me
4 Which Itys still, Itys laments:
5 Afflicted bird, Joves Messenger,
6 Sent for the Summers Harbinger.
7 But, O distressed Niobe!
8 I thee adore my Deity,
9 Which weepest still,
10 From rocky tomb a teary rill.

You are not, Madam, the only she
Who in this grief plead property,
Why you so loud 'bove them within
In The same degree of blood akin
As Chrysotheame and Iphianasse both,
And he who griev's in hidden growth?

Happy whom nor yet long hence
Famed Mycens land shall bear, brave Prince;
Orestes sent by Joves decree;
Whom I unwearied wait to see;
Childlesse, piteous, husbandlesse,
Pining away with wretchedness,
Wasting in tears, nor can be found
What may give my sorrows bound,
While he forgets both what is him done,
And what him taught, false rumors run:
Fain would he e're.
Yet though he would fain does not appear.

Madam cheer up, come cheer,
In heaven great Jove resides
Who all things sees and guides.
To whom excessive passions leaving
Nor senseless be, nor overgrieving,
Time is a gentle god, nor yet
Does Agamemnons youth forget
To come unto his native land
Though now in Crisa's fertile strand.
Nor who the world controlls below,
Will murder see unpunish't go.

But I mean while sans hope perceive
My tender Age poor me to leave,
Nor can I longer stay
Which without Parents fade away:
Nor have a Friend my part to take,
But Pilgrim-like whom all forsake;
At home in these poor cloths must spread,
My Fathers empty Board and Bed.

1 Wretched coming, to remember!
2 Wretched blow given in the chamber!
3 Where with the broad steel-faced Cleaver
4 The Royal Temples they dissever.
5 Treason was Privy-counsellour,
6 Lust was the Executioner.
7 Dreadful they a dreadful sight
8 Wrought, were it god or mortal wight,
9 That acted it.

1 O Day, Curse of my Calendar!
2 O night! O Suppers horrid Cheer!
3 Cracking my loaded Heart.
4 When unworthy Fate did part
5 By base Conspirators my Father
6 Who took, who stroy'd my life together.
7 With whom the great God ruling heaven
8 In vengeance over weight be even.
9 Nor may they e're enjoy their state,
10 Purchased at Treasons rate.

1 Hush, pray not too loud, for know you
2 What harm storming thus may do you?
3 Endangering your present fortune,
4 Your own destruction you importune;
5 And much of needless ill will gain
6 While still you stubbornely complain,
7 To raise strife: forbear; It Is Art,
8 Oppose not the prevayling part,
9 But yoke your heart.

1 I am provoked: I see it, and
2 My impatience understand;
3 But at this fact to grieve
4 I Will not cease, till cease to live.
5 For who would speak well of me, should I?
6 Who that or Honor know's or duty?
7 Comforters leave, leave me alone
8 For this grief must no measure own.
9 Never will I from my labors cease,
10 But still my tears increase.

It Is mere good will all that I press,
Like to some tender Mother;
Breed not griefs one of another.

Tell me what bounds my woes confine,
Is It fit the Dead in scorn to enshrine?
What man does nature bring up so?
May I never in their favor grow.
Nor if I match, some worthy Lord
To live demure will I afford;
But my sad devotions pay
At my Fathers grave will lay.
For if the dead and rotten
Like earth and naught forgotten
Must lie along,
And they the wrong
Not rue, who did the same,
Farewell Virtue, Farewell shame,
And all the gods reputed name.


Hither Im'e with all this ear betake:
And if I prove other then right to say
We straight submit our wills, yours be the day.

Lady's, I am ashamed in your esteem
That I though never so sad, too pensive seem.
But to this life I am perforce inclined:
Pardon, how can a Maid of generous mind,
Seeing her Fathers wrongs do otherwise
Then I, who moan abed, moan when I rise?
Nor waynes my grief, but still increases more.
For first it is my own mother who me bore
Hates me, then they who made away my Father
With me in mine own Palace, live together.
They are my Governors, and they me feed,
From whom then be supplied, I Would rather need.
Besides, what life I lead pray do you count,
When I see haughty Egist perching mount
My Fathers Throne, the self same robes behold
Him wear, my slaughtered Father wore of old.
And in those very rooms where he his Hands
Embrew'd, atone the household Guardians.
And that which gives my utmost woe full stature,
My Fathers sheets are made to hold the Traitor
With my lewd mother, if it be fit at all
That I his bedfellow should Mother call;
And she thus base lodged by the murderer,
Of haunting ghosts never stands one whit in fear,
But as she at the fact made merry, when
She finds the day is come about again,
In which by guile she made our Sire away,
Then she does mask it, then month offerings slay
To saviour-gods, on her thanksgiving day:
Mean while, poor I, 'bout house looking thereon
Cry, fret, and make a lamentable moan,
My Fathers dismal feast to think upon,
All by my self alone; nor can I still
Continual weeper, ever weep my fill.
Then the well-spoken gentlewoman for'c,
With such like curbing girds takes me up short;
Hate of the gods, to you, forsooth, alone
Your Father's dead, none else makes any moan;
An ill end seize on thee, and this doom pursue,
Hell after death thy lease of grief renew.
Thus taunts she. But when any message brings
How that Orestes comes: then out she flings
Like a rude Bedlam, and with rampant voice,
Cries, This your doings is, all this you cause
Which out of my arms reach Orestes get:
But know that thou shall dearly pay the shot.
Thus snaps she, and her fine companion
Standing close by her elbow, eggs her on:
That sneaks in grain, that piece made up of scorn,
That Champion to Lady-duells born.
But I Orestes still expecting, who
Should set me free, mean while decay with woe.
For while he stands contriving, he destroys
At once my present hopes, and future joys:
Nor can I whilst things stand this wise with me,
Lady's or patient or religious be:
For deep afflicting evils burden forces
The best that are to fall on evil courses.

Tel's one thing, Madam, is Egist abroad,
Or here, while you your passion thus unload?

Abroad you may be sure: were he in town,
I durst not peep: he is now to the country gone.

Nay, if 't be so I dare somewhat more free
Own your access, and talk more ventrously.

He is from home, your mind you need not smother.


Then I Will adventure: What news from your Brother?
Comes he, or stay's he? pray for certain tell's.

He promises to come, but nothing else.


Men on great enterprises move but slow.


I Am sure in saving him I did not so.


Fear not, he is one will never desert his friend


No: if I should my life were at an end.


Not a word more; I epsy Chrysotheame,
Your sister of one sire and mothers stem,
Come out of doors; with gifts in hands whose rites
Are proper to appease deceased sprights.

What a complaining, sister, at the gate
Do you make, after your accustomed rate?
Will you never be advised to refrain
From idle passion, but still give it rein?
Why now thus much I by mine own self know
I vex at heart things should be carried so:
And were but my good will with strength protected
They soon should know which way I stand affected:
But in a storm I safely strike my sails,
Nor seem to act, when action naught avayles.
Il'd have you too, Dear Sister, tread this way:
It Is true, that Justice is not what I say,
But what you do; yet if my Liberty
I Will have, I must with those in power comply.

Sad case that you his child whom you pretend
Slighting your Sire, should to your Mother bend.
For all those wholesome counsels you prefer
Are none of them your own, but taught by her;
Wherefore choose one o'th two; or mad be styled,
Or in your wits but an unnatural child.
For you that fitly say, were in place where
Your detestation of them you would declare.
Yet when I seek to right my Fathers shade
Help'st nothing, nay do me that would dissuade:
Does not this Cowardice to sorrow add?
Wherefore or teach me, or else from me learn,
Could I leave off my moan what should I earn?
I live now, poor you will say; Well, yet content:
And while I vex their hearts, at least this rent
(If ought the Dead can please) the dead present.
But you that hate them, hate them sore in word,
Yet to converse with them you can afford
That murde'rd your dear Sire: Il'd never abide it
Though hired with all the knacks in which you pride it;
To crouch to their commands. Enjoy you still
A table richly furnished, wealth your fill:
Give me but food which nature does require,
And to your Gallantry I Will never aspire.
Nor would you were you but your self, for when
You might be called, Daughter to the best of men,
Your Mothers be, so shall't be to you laid
You your dead Father and your Friends betrayed.

Nothing in anger for all loves: It Is right
Each of you says, and each may profit by it.
Would you endure but to be ruled by her,
And she but learn to be your follower.

I am Dear Lady's in a manner used
To these term's from her, and had now refused
To speak, but that a business I discover,
Will make her all her wayling soon give over.

Tells that great business, come; and if 't outvy
My grief, I Will forthwith with your will comply.

Well I Will acquaint you then with what I can:
They mean 'lesse you your puling leave, anon
To turn you thither where no courteous Sun
Bestow's a Visit on the Dungeon.
Where in griefs lonesome Pesthouse shut up close
Far from this Land you may tune out your woes.
Wherefore conform, for now it is time to do it,
And blame me not too late, if you shall rue it.

But are you sure against me this is their doom?


Most sure I am when Egist back shall come.


Now therefore would for me he would come away!


O wretch, what wicked thing is 't you did pray?


That he would come, if it be thus decreed.


To do you mischief? Are you mad indeed?


To rid me from among you all far hence.


What, of your present life have you no sense?


O mine a heavenly life, most wondrous sweet!


At least, it might be, if you 'ld be discreet


Teach me not my deceased friend to forget.


I teach you not, but to power to submit.


You flatter, with my Nature it never stood.


Yet to fall through rashness 't is not good.


We Will fall, if need, to avenge our Fathers blood.


Our Father, he I know with this dispenses.


Such words are slothful Cowards base pretenses.


You Will not be ruled then, nor with me agree?


No truly, never may I so senseless be.


I Am hasting thither where my errand lies.


Whither away? whose is this sacrifice?


My Fathers, whom my Mother sends this gift,


What him the odiousest that ever lived?


Him that she killed, your meaning's that I know.


What friend advised her? who would counsel so?


'T was some night-apparition as I cast.


Now Fathers holy Angels help at last!


Have y' any ground of hopes raised from this fright?


I Will tell you if you will tell's what was the sight.


I know it not: only one little glance.


That little tell's, A word ofttimes may chance
To cast the high down, and the low advance.

There is a speech, that with a second greet,
Your and my Father was seen her to meet
Risen to light: his Royal Staff then rear's,
And plants, which late himself now Egist bear's,
From whose Crown shot forth such a verdant Bough,
All Mycens roosted in its shady Brow.
Thus much I heard one telling, who was there
When she did to the Sun her dream declare:
Farther then this I know not, but that she
Upon that fright this Message sends me.
Wherefore I by thy Fathers gods thee pray,
Be ruled by me, nor cast thy self away.
But thou 'rt still lost, if thou shall disobey.

Hold Sister: none of those things in your hands
Must touch the Tomb, Justice it self withstands,
And Piety; you should our Father carry
Cleansings and offerings from his Adversary.
Wherefore in the winds or some deep-mined cave
Hide 'em where they may never admission have,
Into the presence chamber of his grave.
But let 'em there be saved a goodly prize,
For her own precious self against she dies.
For were she not, the most ungodly she
E're breathed, these hostile offerings could not be
From her the Murderesse to him that fell:
Now judge your self, how can the entered take well
These honors at those hands by which he di'd
In vile disgrace, like a plain foe defied:
Which arm-string'd him, and to scour off the gore,
In cleansing rinc'd the lopt head over and over.
Are not these rather expiations spent,
To compound for the murders punishment?
It must not be; wherefore go set 'em down,
And
And from unhappy mine. Alas! poor shifts,
Yet my small stock affords no better gifts.
Present him with this Hair uncomb'd unpouderd,
Present him with this Girdle unimbroyder'd;
And falling on your knees, beg that he would
Be our Assistant, to revenge his blood,
And that his child Orestes come home safe,
Or's enemies the upper hand may have;
That so with richer hands for time to come
Then now we are able, we may crown his Tomb.
I know, I know he thinks on our conditions,
That thus he sends her these ill boding visions.
Wherefore, sweet sister, underhand bestow
Upon your self and me this favor too,
And him who both of us our being gave,
Dearest of souls, though now laid in the grave.

'T is all religion that she says, and you,
Lady, if wise, will as she bids you do.

I will: For naked truth needs no dispute
To quarrel for 't, but readiness to do 't.
But while I this exploit assay, be sure
You keep my counsel, friends, I you conjure:
For if it chance to reach my mothers ear,
I shall attempt a work will cost me dear.

1 Unless I be much deceived,
2 And of reason quite bereaved,
3 Before is come the Harbinger,
4 Justice self at hand is near,
5 And will show her dreadful powers
6 E're time spin out many hours;
7 Some hope there seems
8 When I hear these pleasant dreams.
9 Nor will Greeces natural Father
10 Ever be forgetful,
11 The ancient Poll-ax Rasor-edg'd
12 With steel wing on both sides fledged,
13 Which with opprobrious stroke,
14 Off its Sovereigne took.
1 And Ir'n hoofd Erinnys couching
2 In dread Ambush is approaching,
3 With many a foot, and many a hand,
4 For without or Law or Band
5 In the twice polluted sheets,
6 Lawless she loves combat meets:
7 Wherefore I guess
8 This dream will, will find success;
9 Both on the Actors and Consenters;
10 Else all dreams come at adventures,
11 And no meahing carry, though
12 Full of terror they may show;
13 And Oracles are tales,
14 If this vision fails.
Pelops! in ill weather
Thy Coach came hither;
Thou drov'st with an ill hand
To this same land:
For since Myrtill was laid asleep,
Thrown in the deep,
With cruel base reproach
Or'ethrown with his Coach
Embossed with beaten gold,
Woe within woe enrolled,
Has dogged close
This sad House.

You now it seems are gadding forth again,
Now Egist is from home, who kept you in,
Lest you abroad your friends should load with lies.
But now he is out o'th way, you me despise.
And many folks you many tales have told,
How I, harsh and outrageous cruel, hold
You and yours under, doing you great wrong:
No wrong; I give bad words to a bad tongue.
Now for your Father (that is all you pretend
Always) how he by me came to his end.
By me? I know it well, and will it own,
But Justice took him off, not I alone;
To whom, if wise, your helping hand y' had lent:
For this your Father whom you still lament,
Only of all the Grecians must proffer
Your sister to the angry gods to offer,
Having in the begetting her not known
My pangs in a hard labor undergone.
Come on now, satisfy me for whose sake
Offered he her. The Greeks, you I answer make.
Now, what had they to do my child to kill?
Or to comply with Menelaus will?
Should he slay mine, and look I should sit still?

Both of them, to be sacrificed then her?
Of father born and mother, for whose sake
They did the expedition undertake:
Or did Death long, and had an eager mind,
On mine to banquet, and leave hers behind?
Or did not your base father rather this,
Hate her by me, and Menelaus loved his?
Does not this Sire the fool and vile bewray?
I think he does, however you say, Nay.
And the dead, could she speak she would consent:
I therefore at what is done do not repent:
And if I seem to you to think amiss,
Do well to load your friends with calumny's.

You Will not say now that I first went about,
To move your heat, and drew this passion out:
But if you will give me leave, I Will tell you true
Of my dead Father, and my sister too.

I give you leave. This modest dialect
Still used, our ready audience might expect.

I tell you then. Your felf profess you spilt
My Fathers blood. A word of blackest guilt,
Were it by right or not, yet I Will assert
It was not Right, but Love did you pervert
To that lewd Paramour, with whom you are naught.
Now ask the Huntresse Dian, for whose fault
She in calm Aulis staid the wind-bound Fleet.
Or I Will reply: for her we cannot meet.
My Father once (as I have heard it talked)
Sporting in the holy Grove, roused as he walked
A spotted, well-brancht Stag, which having killed,
And boasting often by chance, some words he spild,
At which Latona's daughter took offense,
And stopped the Greeks, nor let them stir from thence,
Till he his Child gave her Beasts recompense.
Thus she was given, nor could the Army come,
On other terms back, or to Ilium:
So that unwilling, when he could no other,
He offered her, and not to please his brother.
But grant it were (as you auerre) to further
His brother, must he therefore merit murder
At your hands to be executed? By what order?
Take heed lest while you make a newfound Law
You on your felf woe and repentance draw:
For if blood must with blood assoyled be,
Vou must die first to seal your own decree.
But see if you coin not a vain excuse,
For if you please, resolve me why you choose
Your life in fowl debauchments to abuse,
Which with that Murderer lie, with whom together
Plotting before, you made away my Father,
And gendrest with him, but us out do throw,
The honest issue of a pious vow.
Can I commend you here? is it your pretense,
This too is for your child to make amends?
Fowl answer if it be. No law allows
You should to avenge a child, a foe espouse:
Nor may we our advice present, but still
Incensed you cry, our Mother we revile.
But I in your deportment to us find,
More of the Mistress harsh, then Mother kind:
Which lead sad days, and old acquaintance date
With woes by you occasioned, and your Mate.
But poor Orestes now in foreign lands,
That life with which he hardly escaped your hands,
Clo'yd with distress, consumes; who^ you complain
I for your executioner maintain.
Which, were I able, be assured I would:
And therefore give it out, if you think good,
That I Am ill natured, or unbridled scold,
Or to the depth of impudence am bold:
For if these virtuous qualities I show,
I do not much degenerate from you.

I see her moved but whether justly so
It Is not within my Judgments Verge to know.

What Course now can I take with her that thus
Is not ashamed her Mother to abuse?

For all bold mischiefs a fit instrument?

Assure your self I feel an inward shame,
How e're you think: I am advised, and blame
My Carriage fit nor for the time, nor me.
But your cursed usage and your deeds they be
Malgre my self me to this pass have wrought
For by lewd company, lewd tricks are taught.

O ye Bold Beast, do I or words of mine
Or my deeds you to talk at large incline?

It Is you talk so not I: you do the deed,
And Deeds by words are but interpreted.

Now by our Lady Dian, you shall mourn
For your bold Tongue when Egist does return.

See you're enraged for all I had your leave
To speak my Mind, nor will attention give.

I shall not offer then for you in Peace,
Since I consented to your tongues release.

You may, you shall; Offer, nor blame my Noise,
For hear I Will put a period to my Voice.

You that attend take the fruit offerings thence,
That I to the King may make my Orizens,
To ease my soul, my soul of it is oppressing fear
Phoebus great President of Mycens hear.
Me softly pray, for enemy's stand by,
Nor may I speak all out while she is nigh.
Lest she with clamours loud and Mind perverse
An idle tale through all the town disperse,
Thus hear thou: thus my prayers conceald prevent:
The apparitions last night did present
In both my dreams, Lycean King, for these
If they be lucky, crown them with success
On me; if Hostile, on my Enemy's:
Nor if some ill-affected shall contrive
My ruin from this hight, do thou connive:
But in safe Channel glide my peaceful days
Holding the royal Halls and royal Mace.
And with the friends I have may I still rest,
Bathing in ease, with my dear pledges blessed.
(Bate those Malign my peace, and sweets infest)
Lycean Phoebus to these prayers lend
An open ear, and a propitious End;
And all things else, though not expressed by me,
Which unto you a god must naked be,
For fit it is Joves seed should all things see.

Who can enform one, Lady's, I entreat
If this be Royal Egists Princely seat.

This gentle stranger it is: Right is your aim.


At this his Consort aim I too as nigh?
Her presence personates a Majesty.

Resolve you this great Lady is the same.


Hail gracious Queen, sweet tidings I commend
From one to you and Egist a near Friend.

Succeed the news, but first acquaint me this,
What Master sent you with these Embassy's.

Phanot the Phocese. High concernment it is.


Friend speak it out, you come from a good King,
And a good Message without doubt you bring.

Orestes death in one word take it all.


Woe to me wretch, this day compleats my fall.


What is it? what is it my Friend? her cry's never heed.


Orestes, then and now I say, is dead.


Lost and forlorn I am: I am no more.


Get you about your business, but kind friend
Tell me the certain manner of his end.

I Will tell you all: my Journey was therefore.
Arrived at Greeces high renowned Came,
To enter in the Delphick lists he came:
Where first the crier with shrill voice proclaimed
The race on Foot: This was the foremost named,
He enters brave: the amazed Cirque look on,
Nor by his person was his power outdone.
But fleet he scoures the lazy road, and meets
The forward Goal. The Crown his conquest greets
Of many facts, I can relate but few
Who neither his exploits nor Prowess knew,
Only take this: When ever race was waged,
Or in the
One from the rest to bear away the Day
Was still cried up: An Argive as they say,
Orestes named; great Agamemnons son,
Who levied the Greek host of late renown,
Thus far 'twas so; but if God raise his arm,
No strength is Heaven-proof to stand the harm.
For he one day when of swift
By early Sun they made a speedy Course
Ent'red the Stage with many chariotiers,
An Achive one: from Spartaeone appears;
Their harnest Barbary's two Lybians driv'd,
(And among them he was himself) a fifth,
Lasht his Thessalick Mares: a sixth one jolts
His rattling Coach with bay Etolian colts.
The seventh a Magnesian: In the eighth place,
One with white horse, an Enian by race.
The ninth frow Athens, heaven built was come:
Last, a Boeotian coach filled the tenth room.
Standing where by the lot the Masters find,
What rank should to each chariot be assigned,
At brazen Trump they start, each chiding backs
His slothful Steeds, the waving rein each shak's:
The plains are deafned by the rattling wheels,
And clouds of dust rise from the horses heels:
Pell Mell they drive: None spare for sting: while each,
At to others spokes and panting nostrils reach,
While they put on, the hindmost Courser laves
That Is Back, and that the Rut with foamy waves,
But he his outmost axle always led,
Close to the columns side, and giving head
To the right forehorse, held his fellow straight:
Still all the steady chariots stood upright,
When the Enians hard-mouthed steeds in furious sort,
Set on a running, and then turning short,
After the sixth and seventh stage complete,
Their foreheads on che Barcian Coaches beat,
And as mischances never go alone,
One by another's broke and overthrown:
All the Crisean heath did covered lie.
With shattered limbs of ship-wrackt Chivalry.
This he of Athens shroud at's rein espies,
And gently draws aside, so by there flies
The harnes'd Cataract, tumbling all in heaps.
He drives in the rear; but still Orestes keeps
His horses last, relying on the end.
But when he sees him only left behind,
With a shrill lash his nimble steeds revive,
Pursuing swift, and pole by pole they drive,
Poys'd is the game; and if one overlook,
By to others foreward head he 's overtook.
The unhappy Prince, these Posts unoverthrown,
Upright in upright chariot safe had gone,
When he his left rein slackt, and turning Pole,
Fell unawares upon the Column foul;
The Nave asunder splits, and on the Wheels
He pitches down, and drags his hamperd heels
In The following Tire, and as he fell along,
The plunging horses through the champion flong:
But when the ring beheld the sweet youth slide
Down from the box, with a shrill shriek they cried,
How brave a Prince how bad a fate does share!
Dragged on the ground, then tossing in the air
His hurried legs, till the kind chariotiers
With much ado stopping their mad carriers,
Loosen the bloody corpse, so torn as none
Their friends disfigured countenance could own.
Then forth with certain Phocians ordered, burn
His limbs; and in a little brazen urn,
Conduct the einders of that mighty Name,
That in his Country he may burial claim.
You have it all. Piteous it is to tell:
But had you bin, as we, at the Spectacle,
In my sight never so sad a thing befell.

Woe, woe, our ancient Masters forward hope
Wholly, it seems, is Root and Branch stockt up.

O Jove! what is here! is 't Cursednesse or Bliss?
It Is gain, I grant; yet grievous joy it is,
If mine own sorrows must my life protect.

Why Lady, does this Message you deject?


Childbirth is sharp, and though he prove ungrate,
A Mother yet cannot her own pangs hate.

We on an idle errand come, I see.


Not idle neither, how cannot idle be,
That you of his decease sure signs have brought,
Who when he was of mine own soul begot,
Revolting from my dugs and nurture, run
To foreign Realms; and since he first was gone,
Never saw me, but his Fathers murder charged
On me, and cruel threatenings has enlarged;
So that nor day, nor night, my sleeps were sweet,
But the next hour I looked my death to meet;
But now this day is my deliverer
From all my fears of him, my fears of her.
'Twas she, a worse and inmate grief I housed,
Which gnawed my bones, and my heart-bloud carous'd.
But now, our quiet days, without annoy
Survive, nor shall her threats impeach our joy.

Wo's me poor wretch! 't is time thy fall to mourn,
My dear Orestes, who art yet a scorn
To thy reviling Mother; well is this?

No, not with you; but well with him it is.


Give ear, O Justice, and revenge the dead.


She has given ear aright, and well decreed.


Mock on, for your prosperity now flaunts.


You and Orestes never will leave these taunts.


Yes, we have left, but cannot make you leave


Good stranger, may thou all reward receive,
That thou have freed us from her brawling tone.

Well, I am going then, since that is done.


By no means, Sir, that thought does neither suit
With your great Lords respect, nor my repute:
But enter in, and let her without door,
Her own distresses, and her friends deplore

Do not you mark how passionate, how wild
Distressed Lady she bewayls her child?
That he is dead, and that he thus should die?
No: she unnat'rall laughs. Unhappy I!
I, who dear Brother, perish in thy fall,
While thou have buried at thy Funeral,
My remnant of low hopes to see the day,
When thy just hand full vengeance should display,
A Fathers death, and Sisters wrongs to pay.
Now where shall I my doleful footsteps turn,
Who am all desolate, and twice forlorn?
Brotherlesse Orphan. Once more to their check
Whom I most hate, I must submit my neck,
My Fathers Headsmen serve. With me is 't well?
But 't is resolved, I will no longer dwell
In these cursed walls,
Laying me down, will fade disconsolate,
And let them, if they take this ill within
Kill me, my slaughter were a courteous sin,
To live is pain, the light I hate to spinne.

1 Where be Joves thunders fled,
2 And Phoebus burnisht head,
3 If this they eye,
4 Like standers by?

5 Ah! woe!

6 Lady, why this lament?

7 Oh!

8 Be not too vehement.

9 You kill me.

10 How?

11 If you with hopes beguil me,
12 Of those whom plain we know,
13 Fled to deaths region below:
14 My dying light,
15 You even quench outright.

1 Why the Argive Bard I knew,
2 Whom the gold Bracelet slew,
3 First hid in 's cave.
4 And now in 's grave.

5 Ah! woe!

6 He Is Sovereigne of the dead.

7 Oh!

8 Oh truly! for it is sad.

9 He perished.

10 Yes.

11 True, true: for a friend cherisht
12 His Orphan at 's decease;
13 But none vouchsafes my grief to ease:
14 And he that would,
15 Is blasted in the bud.

1 Sad Lady you sad things endure.

2 I know it, I know it too sure:
3 Sorrow's crowding, overflowing,
4 Never fading, ever growing.

5 We all bear witness to your Cry.

O then look you no more
7 Entice me to give over.

8 What say you?


9 Helpers beside,
10 Hopes of blood royal near allied.

1 All mortals death must undergo.

2 In cruel racing too?
3 As, unhappy, he was mangled,
4 In the winding traces tangled.

5 It was an unseen misery.

6 Yes, for in foreign land,
7 Without my careful hand.

8 Alas now!

He must lie,
9 Nor buried,
10 Nor with my tears upon him shed.

Wingd with delight, and by sweet pleasure chac't,
Quitting all decent gate, I hither have:
For joyful news I bring, and sure repose
From the long burden of your pressing woes.

Whence can you find a balsome for my heart,
Whose wounds are past the slender cure of art?

Oreste's come: take it from me, and know,
It Is sure as that thou strangely eye me now.

Art mad poor wretch: or do thou this design,
To laugh at thine own miseries and mine?

No, household Vesta help me, as no jeer
I mean at all: but he is certain here.

Ah me unhappy! on what mortals breath
Builds thy assurance it is unerring faith?

Mine and none others eyes my authors were,
Sure signs I saw, and a true message bear.

Poor heart, what surety saw thou? from what aim
Striv'st thou to fan my breasts expiring flame?

Now for the gods sakes hark, and as you find
Repute me henceforth sound or weak in mind.

Tell on then, if you pleasure take to tell.


I will, and nothing that I know conceal.
When I approcht my Fathers ancient stone,
Fresh riv'lets of new milk run trickling down
From the hillock I descry: and a sweet rownd
Of several flowers my Fathers ashes crowned.
Seeing I wonder, and I wondering stand
To see the Author, if he were at hand:
But when I viewd the coast on all sides clear,
Nearer the tomb I stole: whose brinks appear
Strowd all about with locks of new-shorn hair:
Which when, poor wretch, I saw, my active thought
A face well known unto my fancy brought:
I straight presaged no hand but that alone
Of dear Orestes could this office own.
Taking them up, no blasting curse I band,
But tears of joy in my warm ey-lids stand;
So that both then, and now, I firmly know,
That these devotions none but him can show:
For, bating us, to whom does this pertain?
Now that my act it is not I witness can;
Nor is it yours: for how could you escape,
Which rue it if but out to Church you step?
Nor does my mothers heart delight to act
Such works, nor had she carried it untrack'd.
Orestes it is; these Honors must design.
Then, dear, courage: Always the face divine
Views not the same with the same constant shine;
It yet has frownd on us, and who can tell,
Whether this day much happiness may seal?

Poor fool! I pity thee even all the way.


What Is this? rejoice you not at what I say?


Thou know not where thou stand'st, nor what is thy thought.


How know I not that which mine eyes me taught?


He Is dead, poor wretch, thy hopes are at an end,
Of aid from him, no more on him depend.

Unhappy me! of whom did you this hear?


Of one which when he fell, himself was near.


And where is he? amazement strikes my breast.


Bout house; my mothers dear and welcome guest.


Unhappy me! who was he then that gave
Those lib'rall off rings at my Fathers grave?

I am persuaded some kind hand has paid
Those sad devotions to Orestes shade.

Distressed me! but I with joy surprizd
Hastened to bring this word, nor once surmizd
In what sad case we are, but coming view,
My ancient Bill of care enflamd with new.

Thus stands your case, but if you will hear my mind,
This pressing load of grief you shall unbind.

Can I the dead to life raise up again?


There Is no such need: I was not sure so vain.


What other action can my strength effect?


Dare but to move as I shall you direct.


Why if 't be good, I will not come behind.


See, without pains nothing success can find.


I see: and will contribute too my All.


Hark then which way my resolutions fall.
Our store of friends, you know that none we have
But all are svvallovv'd by the ravenous grave.
And only we distressed pair survive.
Now while I heard my brother was alive
And flourisht, still, one day, my hopes did rest,
He for his Fathers blood would make inquest.
But since he is gone, to you I turn my eyes,
That with your sister joining enterprise,
You should not now to execute defer
Egist our Fathers executioner:
For naught it boots longer my thoughts to stop,
And till when will you slug? upon what hope
Not slighted look you? You indeed may moan.
Of your revenue robbed and portion:
And you may grieve which to this ancient day
Unbedded and unwedded wear away.
Nay, never must you look these joys to meet:
For think not Egist is so indisereet,
To suffer once your stock or mine to flourish,
Which were his open overthrow to nourish.
But if you will my earnest counsel trust,
First to our Fathers and our Brothers dust,
Perform the Ceremony's of the Dead,
Then as you are nobly born, and nobly bred,
Assert thy Name, and thou a Match shall find
Of worth, for all to virtue are inclined.
But as for fame, you know not what respect,
Obeying me, on us both you reffect.
For who or Friend or Stranger shall us meet,
But will us with this commendation greet?
Mark Dear Companions those two Sisters: those
Who from the Dust redeemed their Fathers house.
Who when Victorious Treason highest flew,
Spared not for life, but the bold rebel slew:
These we must love: these we must reverence all:
And for their Spirit at Feasts and publik Hall,
Receive with Honor Epidemicall.
Thus shall all living us with praises Crown,
So that nor Life, nor Death shall want renown.
Wherefore Dear soul be ruled your Sire relieve,
Assist your Brother, rescue me from grief.
Rescue your self: Assured of this, it is base
Well to be born and live in foul disgrace.

In such affairs Advice were a good Friend,
To them that Counsel, and them that atend.

Now e're she spoke, Lady's, had Virtue reigned,
She Modesty had kept which now is stained.
For on what grounds in desp'rat boldness yet
Dress you your Heart and fain would me abet?
Nor count how you are Woman born not Man,
Inferior is our Sex, and lesser can;
Then their Prosperity in Spring-tides flow'th,
Ours back is Eb'd and parcheth into Drouth.
Who then shall plot to stricke off such a Head,
And think to carry it unpunished?
See then lest Bad enough to Worse advance;
If any Ear on these our Counsels glance.
For naught it helps us, nor our stare amends,
To gain good Names, and come to shameful End^.
For Death is not the worst, but Death to will.
Nor to be able this Will to fulfill.
Now I beseech you e're you root us out
At once, and bring your Family to naught,
Assuage your heat: and all which has been said;
Unspoke, Undone, shall safely up be laid.
Only your Spirit check, and learn at length
How weak you are, and then submit to strength.

Be ruled: No treasure Man enjoy's so great
As is a wise Forecast, and mind disere^s.

All this before I looked for: I expected
That all which was applied should be rejected:
But with my Hand this work alone will I
Archieve: nor will we let out counsels die.

Oh --
Would when my Father died your Mind had been
Thus firmly bent; you all had finished then.

Why then my will was good, but loss my wit.


Strive that your wit stand always at that height.


You then instruct me but will nothing Aid.


Why it will bring us ruin if assayed.


I praise your wondrous Wit, but hate your fear.


When you shall thank me for it I Will give ear.


Never expect to find me in that Note.


Of that Hereafter gives the surer Vote.


Away, for thou art one will it nothing do.


I would, but thou art one wilt nothing know.


Go tell your Mother the discourse we have had.


No, Sister, yet I love you not so bad.


Know you to great disgrace draw me aside.


To no disgrace, but wisdom I you guide.


I follow must what you for Justice read.


When you with Judgment join, then you shall lead.


Pity one speaks so well, and speaks so wide.


Right said you that, to your own speech applied.


What seem I not with Justice to combine?


Yes but sometime Justice with Harm may Join.


I Will never to these laws Alleagiance pay.


But if you do, you will thank me for it one Day.


Yes I will do, nor will at all you dread.


Is 't true? nor will you second Counsel read?


No: for of Bads, the Worst Bad Counsel is.


All I have said you understand amiss.


Long fixed is this resolve; no sudden Motion.


Then I am gone, for on my words attend.
You will not, nor can-I your works commend.

Go in: never will I be at your devotion,
Though most you wish it; for it is foolish pains,
If we Content pursue, where none remains.

are so, still be wise;
But when you feel it, you will praise my Advice.

1 Why mark we the wise fowl, Above,
2 In Country and in Natural love;
3 Where the Dam looks to be fed,
4 Of those she has born and bred;
5 Nor do like Tribute pay.
6 But if Jove thunder has,
7 And heavenly Themis wrath;
8 They Carry't not Away.
9 Fame dovvnvvard spring,
10 And this doleful Message ring:
11 In the Dead Atrida's hearings
12 Of these cruel interferings,
1 Their House-affairs have long been weak,
2 Their children now in quarrels break:
3 Nor does long converse as yet
4 Their Divisions Umpire set.
5 Electra still does float:
6 Poor she betrayed alone,
7 Always her Sire does moan,
8 In The Nightingals sad note:
9 Nor cares for Death;
10 But provides to morgage breath,
11 While she those twin-imps destroys.
12 In such life what Lady joyeth?
1 None low of means, and high of place,
2 Endure their honors to debase
3 With scorn. Great Lady, thus
4 You hard afflictions choose
5 Companions of your Age.
5 Opposing Treasons Rage.
7 At once with double honor crowned,
8 A child both wise and virtuous found.
1 O may thou live in wealth and strength
2 Above thine enemies at length,
3 More then thou do Below!
4 I thee entirely know;
5 Afflicted thou heldst forth
6 High principles of worth:
7 Thou always did for Pilot own
8 Immovable Religion.

Have we Dear Lady's, been directed right,
And do we on our purposed journey hit?

What is your search? and whether your desire?


For Egist, where he dwells I long enquire.


You're right, and harmless your directour save.


Who then to those within this errand carries,
That here a welcome message for them tarries?

Here 's one. if of her Brother news she have.


Go, Maiden, them within acquaint; At gate
Some men of Phocia for Egist wait.

Unhappy me! You come not to evince,
The late report we had by certain signs

Your talk I know not: But some weighty thing
Touching Orestes, from old Strophius bring.

What is it friend? I feel a chilling fear.


We in small Urn these Funeral relics bear
In hand, behold it, of Orestes here.

Ay wretched me! Now plain before mine eye,
I see the weight, and feel the misery.

If for Orestes you a tear let slide,
Know that this pitcher does his Body hide.

Friend, give me leave, for the gods sake I am bold,
To take this in my hand, if this him hold:
That over these ashes I may wail and moan
My self, and all my family undone.

Come reach it her, who e're she be, for sure
I Will will would never this request precure:
But or some Friend, or else in blood she is near.

O thou his monument, who was most dear
The remnant of Orestes soul: how wide
Thy settings-forth, and thy return's divide?
For now my hands can poyse thy empty load,
But, child, I sent thee glorious abroad.
Would I had breathed my last e're I thee left
To foreign lands, and saved thy life by theft!
Then had thou with thy Sire that day destroyed,
As Death with Death, so Grave by grave enjoyed.
But now from home, and vagrant in strange coast,
Without thy Sister, thou art sadly lost.
Nor did with tender hands unhappy I,
Thy loved corse in Barhings purify:
Nor did I take, as decent rites require.
The doleful burden from the solemn fire:
But by strange hands laid out, thou do return
The easy measure of a shallow Urn.
Wretched me! Oh my feeding thee of old
Now comes to naught! For often I thee did hold,
Nursing with peasant trouble. Thou were styled
Not more at all thy Mothers, then my child.
I was thy Nurse, not they within reputed.
And I thy sister always was saluted.
But all these comforts in one day are dead,
With thee expiring: thou with them art fled.
Thou like a whirlwind rush'dst: Fallen is my Father:
I from thee perishr: Thou destroyed together.
The euemy laughs, and wild with joy does rant
Thy Stop-dame-Mother; which lewd miscreant
Thou often to me in private message sent,
That thou would bring to condign punishment.
But all those just resolves, and vews repeated,
Thine, and my angry Angel have defeated,
Which thus to me has in sad wise conveyed
For thy sweat Face, this dust and useless shade.
O me! O me!
O Doleful corse! Ay! Ay!
O how dismal! Oh me! O me!
A journey tookst thou, Dearest, to my death,
Thy Sisters death, O soul more dear then breath.
Wherefore thou Me to Thee take in this room,
Nothing to nothing: so for time to come
I Will lodge with thee Below: for thou Above
And I did always equal fortunes prove.
And now I long thy Death and Urn to share:
For I perceive not that the dead take care.

Electra, think a Mortal Sire you had,
And Mortal Brother too, nor grieve too bad,
For we are out-lawed all till Death be paid.

Oh! oh! what shall I say? what strange address
Contrive? nor can I longer me suppress.

What is your grief? what may this language sound?


Is yours Electra's visage so renowned?


This is the same, and in full grievous plight.


Alas! how sad and pitiful a sight!


Why Stranger, do you thus for me lament?


O Body wickedly and basely rent!


I, gentle Stranger, am the same you moan,


O sad unwedded desolation!


Why, Stranger, look you thus on me, and sigh?


Of all my sorrows I never knew the tithe.


How know you that from ought has now been spoken?


In seeing you with many troubles broken.


Few of my troubles are to sight disclosed.


And how can worse then these be once supposed?


Because I still with murderers converse.


Murdrers? of whom? strange grief thou do rehearse.


My Fathers Murdrers; and am made their drudge.


What mortal does thee to this bondage judge?


One Mother called, but nothing Mother-like.


And by what means? Does she thee starve or strike?


Both starvs and strikes, and all hard usage tries.


And does no Helper, no Defender rise?


None, and my One that was is in your urn.


Poor heart, I pity all along thy turn.


Know you are the only He has done thus much.


For I am the only He your troubles touch.


You are not any way to us allied?


I Would you resolve, might I in these confide.


You may; with honest Lady's you confer,


Let go the Pot then, and the business hear.


Use me not, Stranger, for the gods sake so.


Obey my words and you aright shall go.


Not for all dears: rob me not of my treasure.


I can you not excuse.


Hard is my measure
If I thy dust, Orestes, must let go.

Good words. Those groans no lawful warrant show.


No warrant, when I groan for my dead brother?


Those words do not become you, but some other.


Am I so of the deads inseriours?


Inferior you of none: nor is this yours.


If this Orestes body be, I poyse.


Its no Orestes, but a coined device,


Where then, unhappy, is his tomb indeed?


No where: For men alive no tomb do need.


What say thou man?


No lie I do contrive.


And does he breath?


As sure as I Am alive.


You are not he?


See this my Fathers Seal,
And lern if I other then truth reveal,

O dearest fuce!


Dearest I witness bear.


O voice art come?


No other seek to hear.


I thee embrace.


O may thou e're from hence!


Dearest companions, fellow citizens;
Behold Orestes by a fiction slain,
And by that fiction safely brought again.

Lady, we see. And all our grief to heal.
A tear of joy down from our eyes does steal.

1 O Noblest, Noblest Progeny
2 Of the most Reverend, to me
3 At length brought back;
4 You come, you find, you see those whom you you lack,

1 We Are come: But over us let still silence hover.

2 What is the business?

3 Silence were best, lest they within discover.

1 Now Dian aid,
2 Eternal maid,
3 Of that be never afraid.
4 While such a female swarm
5 Still in the house, ring their alarm.

1 Beware, for women too can war assay:

1 O joyful day!
2 Thou haft restord our light,
3 Wrapped up in constant night,
4 In one continued West,
5 So were our hearts distressed.

1 I know this too; but then we will reflect
2 On these affairs, when season shall direct,

1 All time, all time I do repute
2 My present joyfulnesse to suit,
3 So just, so fit;
4 For never could I speak with freedom yet.

1 There I consent. Wherefore now keep it safer.

2 By what endeauours?

3 By not enlarging, while time does not favor.

1 Upon what fear
2 Now you appear
3 Can I to speak forbear,
4 When unwarn'd, unadvised,
5 I see thee hither come disguised?

1 Thou see me when the Gods decreed my way.

1 Blessed news you say,
2 Greater then yet I knew,
3 You tell a joy that is new;
4 If God did guide, I say
5 Auspictous is your way.

1 Full loath I am to check your joy, but yet
2 to pleasure you too much submit.

Thou who did please though held by long demurre
This pleasant voyage to prefer
Me spouse of sorrows do not thou --

What should I not?


Do not me disallow
The pleasure of thy presence to declare

With others I Would be angry should they dare.


You like me then!


Why should I otherwise


O friends a voice
Which I exspected not I heard,
My anger speechless was,
And I to cry aloud afeard;
But now I hug thee; on thy face
A pleasant shine does sit
Which I though full of care should never forget.

From all impertinent discourses cease:
Nor teach me that debancht my mother is;
That Egist all our Fathers coffers spends;
Wast's some himself, and shares some with his Friends.
The time would pass should we discoursing stand
But what may further the design in hand
Tell me, how in an hid or ouvert way,
My coming may my laughing foes allay.
And when we enter hold a watchful eye,
Lest you with cheerful looks your Mother spy,
But to the t^le of grief a groan let fly:
For, when our labors have obtained the goal,
Then we may laugh and joy without control.

Well Brother, what may make to your content
Shall be my care: for all my joys I rent
Derived from you, nor can my Freehold call;
Wherefore I would not, to your grief though small.
A great advantage reap: For I full ill
Should hearken to my present Angels will.
Nor can you otherwise but know the sum
Of our affairs: How Egist is from home;
But here within my Mother, whom never doubt
Lest she my merry countenance find out:
For both in ancient feud I with her burn;
And seeing the pleasure of your safe return,
To drop my liquid joy in plenteous shower,
Nor ever will desist, nor have the power:
For I have the^ dead and alive beheld
At ene approach, and wonders reconciled:
So that should I my Father meet alive,
Faith unastonisht to the sight I Would give:
Wherefore your own way, since you are arrived.
Lead on; for I had this alone archiev'd,
I had not missed what still was in my eye,
Bravely to quit my self, or bravely die.

Silence I you advised. Some from within
I hear is coming forth.

Come, Strangers, in;
For what you bring, can neither forth be kept,
Nor can the taker with delight accept.

O Men most vain, and of all wit bereft,
What, of your lives have you no value left?
Or have you not of common sense a taste,
Who do not once conceive how you are placed,
Not at the Brink. but in wide hazzards deep!
For had not I light in the house to keep
A faithful ward, into the inmost room
Before your persons, your designs had come.
But now a sure provision I have made:
Wherefore aside all long discourses laid,
And dangerous joy by lavish shouts bewrayd,
Enter the house: for peril tracks delay,
And expedition here must win the Day.

How at my entrance are things managed there?


Right well: for none will know you who you are.


You then have of my death reporter been?


Know you are one of to other world within.


And are they glad thereat? what words are given?


When all is done I Will answer: But until
All Is there, even that which is not well, is well.

Brother, I beg, resolve me what is this man?


Know you him not?


Nor yet imagine can.


Know you not whom you gave me in his hands?


Whom? what d' you mean?


Who to the Phocian lands
Conveyed me secretly, sent by your order.

Is this that man, the only He of all
Whom I found faithful at my Fathers fall?

The same it is: examine me no further.


O dearest face! O only ransomer
Of Agamemnons house! how camst thou here?
Art thou He which from Death have him set free,
And me from odious captivity?
Dearest, those hands, and those beloved feet
A sweet embassage bear! Nor did I heed
Thy near converse, nor would disclose; but flew'st
Me with thy words, when truth most dear, thou knewst.
Hail Father! for methinks I see my Father.
Hail, and know, thee most of all men together,
In one days compass I did hate and favor.

Enough: for these discourses made at pleasure,
The wheeling Nights, with equal Days may measure:
Which you Electra thus shall entertain.
But you that here attend, I tell you plain,
Now action fits: Now the Queen's all alone.
Now there is no man within: But if you drone
Consider how with these, and wiser far,
Being more then these, you must engage in War.

Pylade, this work no further long delay
Requires, but in we with all speed we may.
And let us our homage offer to the gods
Which in this entrance take up their abodes.

Apollo, them with favor hear,
And me with them: for I did still appear.
With hand enlarged, according to my power.
And now, Lycean King, I bring my store,
I pray, I prostrate me, I beg. Combine
Thy aid propitious in this great design.
And then the unbelieving world shall see,
What due rewards the gods to vice decree.

1 See how Mars breathing hostile blood,
2 Before is tasting of his food,
3 And entered rove within the house
4 The chasers of facts villaxous
5 The Hounds below!
6 So that not far behind does go
7 That which my mind did long foreknow.
1 For in the house brought from the dead,
2 The Judge in a disguise does tread,
3 His Fathers rich and ancient seat,
4 Grasping in hand his blade new whet:
5 And Maia's son,
6 Close Merc'ry leads them, putting on
7 A mist to the last, nor tarry's till anon.

Lady's most dear, The men within disspatch
The business, here do you with silence watch.

How? Now what do they?


While she does provide
A cauldron for the dead, they stand beside.

And why did you come out?


To stand a guard,
Lest Egist enter in and never be heard.

Ah! Ah! Woe! the House
Widowed of Friends, and seized upon by Fiends!

One cri's within, do you not hear my friends?


1 I a dismal hearing heard,
2 Made unhappy me afeard.

1 O me forlorn! Egist, where art thou? gone.

2 Look, one cri's out again.

O son! O son!
3 Pity thy Mother.

But I Am sure nor He,
4 Nor his own Father, pitied were by thee.

1 Wretched City; wretched House,
2 Now the Fate of old thine own
3 Thee into waste ruins throw's
4 Down, Down.

Oh! I am stabbed!


Courage and mend your blow.


Oh! and again!


Would Egist were so too!


1 The Curses prove. They breath
2 Whom Earth had lodged beneath:
3 For he which long ago was dead, now drains,
4 Channels of Blood from out the Murderers veyns.

1 So they come forth, his Crimson hand does wreak
2 With Wars oblation; But I cannot speak
3 How are things carried?

Things within are wrought
4 Well if Apollos wisdom well has taught,
5 The Wretch is Dead; Henceforth all Fear displace,
6 Your Mothers spite never shall you more disgrace.

1 Peace! for I discover clear,
2 Egist does in sight appear.

1 Lady's, what not retire?

Do you perceive
2 The Man at Hand?

He does the suburbs leave
3 With Jocond pace --
4 --

1 In the House: go Ambush'd sit,
2 With all present speediness:
3 Those things hitherto have hit
4 May these!

1 Rest quiet we perform your will.

Then have.


2 I Am lodged.

My charge be over these actions placed


1 'Twere best a while picquere,
2 And buzze into his ear
3 Some idle tale; and play the fish, that so
4 He unawares may rush on judgments blow.

1 The Phocian strangers which of you can shows
2 Who of Orestes death they say bring news,
3 That he was cast away in the Chariet-wrecks?
4 Can you? or you? or can you I must ask
5 That were so fierce before: for you I take
6 Here most concerned, and best report can make.

Alien to my dearest grief.

Resolve me where one may the strangers live find


Within: for they have met with their Hosts kind.


And did they say for certain he was Dead?


No, (but they showed him too) not only said.


And may we see this plain convincing light?


You may: your self will pity much the sight.


Much joy thou tell me of besides thy wont.


Increase your joy if this for joy you count!


Silence I will you, and the Gates unfold,
That Argives and Mycenians may behold:
That so if any with presumption spread,
Has stuff't his Sails, seeing the Prince is dead
He may my Curb endure, and henceforth fear
Least condemn, his haughty Head to rear.

My duty is performed: for I late wit
Have got, and can to power now submit.

Jove! A sight I see with sorrow clo'yd,
But whether judgments hand I not decide.
Withdraw the Veil that even I may shed,
A tear upon my Kinsman that is dead.

Take it your self. It Is not mine but your own
To look upon, and with kind words to mean.

It Is right, I will: But some of you 'bout House
Go Clytemnestra hither call to us.

She is hard by you; look no further for her.





Whom look you on with horror?


What Men have me within their nots enclosed
At unawares?

Have you not that supposed,
How you alive talk with the Dead thus free?

Alack, I take the word. It cannot be,
But this Orestes is, who talks with me.

You out so long and such A Cunning Man!


Wretch I am lost: yet let me this obtain
Hear one word.

Brother, do not, I beseech
Let him go on, and spin a teadious speech.
For wherein is a Dying Man relieved
If he one grievous Minute be reprieved?
But kill him out of hand, and being killed,
Give him the Bury all of the open field
Out of our sight: for only this will lose
The sad remembrance of my ancient woes.

Get you in quickly: For you now Commence
An Execution and no defense.

Why do you hale me in? if this be fair
Why lacks it Night, and dreads the open Air?

Appoint you not. But to the Chamber hy
Where you my Father killed and there Come die.

Is it ordein'd that that same Room must see
The Pelops Ills that are, and Are to be.

It must yours. I of that give a shroud guess.


Your Fathers honor you do not profess.


You much dispute, but go but slowly on.
Advance.

Go first.


No you must lead the van.


Shall I not escape you.


I must now beware
All ease that you a bitter death may share.
'Twere fit this Martial law did still prevail,
That who so durst transgress the statutes pale,
Might straight be killed, for villains soon would fail.

Atreus seed how hard oppressed,
Art thou at length arrived at rest
by this Assay redrest!

BRight Saint, Just Heaven has seen thy Tears:
Thy Brother on our Isles appears.
Request and Sorrow now leave off,
When glad Enjoyment says, Enough.
Let no sad Thought take from the grace
Of a serene and full-blown Praise.
Looks over-cast but ill do suit,
The Royal Stranger to salute.
Honor with mirth now reconciles:
Reject not those officious smiles
Which hover yet aloof, and seek
To perch upon your lovely cheek.
MADAM, Lift up your pleasant eye,
In yonder Nook sits Majesty.
Our Sov'reigne at that Spot begun
Three Kingdoms just Possession.
Thus a received Turf does yield,
Full seisin of its native Field;
And from that straight and distant sphere,
Weighs and directs his free Carier.
As first the early point of Day,
Aloof does but the Earth survey,
But straight the dark profound invades,
And chases out the flying shades.
There he debates what ready way,
A glorious Entrance to assay.
The numerous sinners he descry's
Parted by Seas and Enmiti's.
He sees, and so do the sage States,
That as their Fear, their Love abates:
Because, though their grim Horsemen tread
Upon the quaking Countries head;
Though they our lives hang at their beck,
And a stiff yoke about our neck;
Though they can spoil without Consent,
Yet e're they rule we must Indent:
Force can but in a Rape engage,
'T is Choice must make it Marriage.
Hence a Conveyance they contrive,
Which must on us their Cause derive:
This must attaque, what holds out still,
And is impregnable, the Will.
This must enchant our conscious hands,
To slumber in like guilty bands,
While like the froward Miltonist,
We our old Nuptial knot untwist:
And with the hands, late faith did join,
This Bill of plain Divorce now sign.
Here their New Kingdom must commence,
And Sin conspire with Conscience.
This spills our Blood lost in just wars,
And brands with Shame our honest Scarrs:
His Fathers murder this commends,
And crowns it with its plotted ends.
His Sacred Person this assayles,
And the dire Regicide entayles.
He, the bold Blank defied discerns,
And Malice but his Laughter earns;
So what they for fresh lists devise,
Into their thin short Kingdom pry's.
Next he the Realm views in all parts
Shut on Him, but the Peoples hearts.
While his approach new warmth does shed
On those Desire had massacred.
His double Righteousness all draws
That of Himself, that of his Cause:
His Person Signatures presents
Where King and Conquest pitch their tents;
Taller, then Palms, whose humble Top,
Does to his lofty Temples stoop.
And pays a tributary Bough;
To bind on his Victorious Brow.
Then Beacons placed on Mountains, those
Mountains which HER late Prince outgrows
A valiant Black his Brow does wear,
Our reverence; but Traitors fear:
His look speaks out, it was designed,
Subjects to conquer, not to find.
Which Heat, lest we should fear his Ray's,
The Fathers Clemency allay's;
See how our heaving Souls enlarge!
See how fresh Spirits our strength surcharge!
Till in his Banner wrapped we prove,
Nothing so strong as loyal Love:
And touched from Heaven with holy flame
His Throne we plant, his Foes we tame.
GReat Princess, Then the Royal Nun,
Shall find her Husband in her Son.
And take, since mourning weeds must cease
Beauty and Honor for her dress.
Her love impregnable did stand,
Against the Sea, against the Land.
While her Lord grieved, she scorned delight,
Companion of his Bed and Flight.
She thought it Dutiful to claim
A Portion in her Husbands shame.
Wherefore our streets when she shall pass,
Proud Matrons shall empale the ways:
And as she walks her pious Ey's,
Our easy Dames will Catechize.
Thy Prison too shall then fly open,
And ripe deliverance kiss Hope.
Here Thy free sight at large shall rove,
And Thou if but look up Above,
Thy Brother in his Throne shall eye
Burnish't in a full Majesty.
About his Seat at each just Hand,
A bright Array of Peers shall stand.
Not such who take up their high Name,
On credit of some dalliant Dame:
These in mean Lusts spend their cheap Age,
Nor ought degenerate from the Page.
Hence, they at rates low as their wit,
Can their usurped Honor quit.
For though an Apparition gay,
May ruffle in the milky way.
Taking acquaintance with the star's,
Like one of their familiar Peers:
Nay may rant down the lesser fry,
Like Younger Brothers of the sky;
And boasting of his richer light,
First Cozen to the Sun should write:
Yet if he shall his Orb resign;
Shut up his Windows; cease to shine;
If his assumed Beauty's smoot;
And through the empty Hollow shoot;
Scattering all along the air,
His periwig of yellow hair;
Till he the lower Region plough,
And takes his bed up in a slough:
The Gazer that did late admire
His flagrant robes, and Tissue fire,
That then the Gallant did rehearse
Amidst the sparkling Courtiers,
When he perceivs his borrowed Lamp
With its exhausted Oil to damp;
Soon tracks the Cheaters sordid birth
From some dull Commoner of earth.
This Arm o'th sea of light mistook,
Dried up, proves Land-waters and Brook.
Our Lords their own clear line make good,
Marked out by loyal Parents blood,
Which the unspotted Plumes does lave,
That on their Crowned Temples wave:
They vouch their True and High Extraction,
By constant Faith, by noble Action.
Then let thy meek Affection bow,
To view and glad our Realm Below.
Here from a Popular bondage freed
The Country shall list up her head;
The Whip and Yoke now under hoof,
She kissing the sost rein of love,
With thankful mirth aloud shall ring,
Preferred to serve her gracious King.
Thou shall one spotless joy behold,
By no allaying sigh controlled.
Thus mark in Halls of great resort,
At Penshurst, or some Princes Court,
If my Lords angry Gentlemen
(The Upper House of his great train)
Or some big Steward shall crush down
His Fellows with perpetual frown;
The House, because he domineers,
And Takes upon him over his Peers,
Think the Yoke too hard to be born;
Not for the Burden, but the Scorn.
When if the wiser Lady soon
Spy and remove the grief, anon
You may a cheerful duty see,
Flit through the busy Family.
No Monster is so much abhorred,
As an Inferior surly lord.
The Villagers their knees shall bow,
Not awed by a stern troopers brow:
As Larks upon their Pestles squat,
If but one daring Hobby bayt.
Nor shall this Care their gladness spoil,
How they to be undone must toil.
The VVealthy City shall give thanks
In decent State, and Reverend ranks:
Not offering up constrained Rites,
Amidst Church-driven Proselytes.
No lip a faint Amen shall say,
While the Recusant Heart would, Nay.
The Heart whose pensive strings are wrackt,
With stock decayed, and credit cracked:
For draining taxes more unsluce
Their gains, then does blood-thirsty Use.
While they a thin subsistence beat,
Manured by Perjury and Sweat,
Tacking a fortune up, until
Themselves, the last of VVares they sell,
For unseen stars and Countries bound,
Where no Wise Parliament is found;
For where the savage Ethiop fries,
No pineond Dragon is so Wise.
Our welcome Exiles home shall flee:
Our waiting Captives be set free.
From obscure Denns, from untrackd Caves
The retired Clear shall break their graves:
And from Contempt reformd put on
Glory and resurrection.
The Sons of VVisdome shall release
Their patient Spirits into meek peace;
Each reassuming his old Care,
Seated in a becoming Chair;
Hoary their Heads, their Tongue discreet,
Open their Hands, spotless their Feet.
When thou beholdest this rich Joy,
Embased by no sad Alloy;
Then mix thy Note and with one Quire,
Let our free Souls in Praise aspire.

