SInce that the Apes and Parrots of the Stage,
Are filenc'd by the Clamours of the Age;
Like Conies forced to feed on Bran and Grass,
(The true Desciples of Pithagoras)
Whose Copper-Lace, and Copper-Noses once
Made them to think themselves great Prester-Johns:
You Will (sure) have cause to praise, and thank that man
Can make each Thief a complete Roscian:
Then much good do it you (Sirs) fall to and eat,
You never had cheaper (perhaps) better meat.

Drink deep my brave boys of the Bastinado
Of Stramazons, Tinctures, and ^lie-passata's,
Of the Carricado, and brave Enb ocada,
Of Blades and Rapier-Hil^s: of surest guard
Of the Vincentio, and Eurgonian Ward:
Have we not bravely tossed this bumbast-foil-button.
Win gold, and wear gold Boys, it is we that merit it,

Come, let us share.


I, I, each man as he deserves.


If each man claim no more then he deserves.
There will be a precedence for pelf

Monstrum horrendum: 'twere incongruous.


No fractions my dear Myrmidons,
Stand firm to your old form of Discipline.

But Sir, must all our judgments mump and set,
And rest upon this kickshaw Marmoset:
This Athens Ape 'cause he can simpringly
Yaul Auditores humanissimi.

True (Latro)


He Is the mere Sponge that sucks up all our gain;
A very Tumbrel stuffed with --
Whom we preserve, as Witches their Familiars,
With prodigal expense of our own blood.

Non laedere
sed ludere,
Non Laneae
sed linea,
Non ictus
Sed nictus
potius.

Pox of your cunning canting tongue
That beastly language merits more then halter.
The Ax or stigmatizing --

No more my Stern Copartners in ill,
Skilful Surveyers of Highways and Hedges,
Grammaro must not thus be cudgeld (Sirs) his orisons must make way for our
souls, when by sinister chance we leave the earth. Learnings that general
Soul which Plato says
Fixes the world; we must make much of him.

Sol latet in herbis.
My anger goes down with the Sun (Sir,)

Come; all shake hands, -- my habit Spolario, Are all our. Horses, and our Arms
in safety


They feed like Pluto's Palfrayes under ground,
Our Pistolls, Swords, and other surniture
Are safely locked up at our Randevouz.

He lingers strangely --
Did he assare you confidently he would come.

Should death (Sir) meet him or his Fathers Ghost,
They Would hardly th'wart his Journey; I perceived him
Wrapped in so mirthful an Astonishment,
He scarce could frame an Answer to my Message;
The Ape did chatter to himself
Like to some bill-patcht door, whose entrails have
Spewed out their Tennant, oh I ravished him,
He Would come.

Are the Gaggs fixed, and all the Gives in readiness.


They are.


Be gone.


Peace here be multiplied.


You are most welcome (Sir)
I see you will make the

Sir, I have ever held it plety to gratify my friends on good conditions, here
is five thousand pounds; five thousand more shall be your own whon I have viewed
the goods


You are most nobly honest;
Drink (Sir) a hearty glass.

What Is this a Masque?


A Matachin, you will find it.


Aw, Aw, Aw.


Bear his two servants
Amongst their fellow beasts in the Ostrey:
Take that Westphalia-Gammon-Clove stuck-face,
And box him up within that Leather Engine.

Aw, Aw, Aw.


This bag belongs to Capt. Martius,
who with his Dagger often hacks his sword,
And with whole Culverin raging oaths does tear
The Vault of Heaven, spetting in the eyes
Of Nature, natures loathsome blasphemies:
Five hundred pounds in gold it lately boasted,
This old Extortioner shall return the sum,
And think he cheaply is a Libertine:
Transport him hence into that Captains Chamber;
This Key will give you entrance.
There place this putrid piece of parcemonie.
Anon we will share our Coin, and suck our Sack.
Still be propitious juggling
I Will lade with Hecatombs of spotted Kine:
For roguing Virtue brings a man defame,
A pack-staff Epethite, and scorned name.

TUsh! Pluto's wrath Proserpin can melt,
So that thy Sacrifice be freely felt:
What cannot Juno force in bed with Jove,
Turn and return a Sentence with her love:
Well! plainly thus; Slight, Force, are mighty things
From which even all, all earthly glory springs.
If Virtues self were clad in humane shape,
Virtue without these might go beg and scrape:
The naked truth is, a well-cloath'd lie,
A nimble quick-pate, mounts to dignity;
By force or fraud, that matters not a jot,
So massy wealth may fall into thy lot.
Quod gratis grate; and I dare aver
That Hiadolgo the Astrologer
Is a right honest man -- All hail my Sovereign.

Prithee no Jibs,
Thou know my plot upon fair Infortunia;
A wealthy widow; nay, a beauteous widow;
A Lady of high birth, and great perfection,
Be thou my conduct and my Genius,
My wits inciting sweet-breathed Zephirus;
Some Verses, some Verses, my Helliconian Harper,
Women are strangely taken with strange words.

Totum in toto, Sir, I have fitted you I faith,
I was fain to devour one whole page out of Ovid,
Three large sized sentences out of Catullus
One Axiom out of Hero and Leander;
And a whole stanzao out of Venus and Adonis,
Ere I could hit upon a right strain of poesy;
But at length I hammered them out.
pray mark me,
Fairest piece of well-form'd earth,
Urge not this your haughty Birth,
The power which you have over us lies,
Not in your race but in your eyes
Should you no Honey vow to taste
But what the master Bees have placed
In compass of their cells, how small
A portion to your share would fall;
The sap which at the root is bred
In Trees through all the Boughs is spread,
But virtues which in Parents shine
Make not like progres through the line:
It Is not from whom, but where we live,
The place does often those graces give
Great Julius on the Mountains bred,
A Flock perhaps, or Herd had led;
He that the world subdued had been
But the best Wrestler on the Green;
It Is Art and Knowledge which draw forth
The hidden seeds of native worth,
They blow those sparks and make them rise
Into such flames as touch the Skies.
Smile but on me and you shall scorn
Henceforth to be of Princes born.

They are most incomparable;
It Was well remembered for to urge my breeding;
My birth I Am sure would Butcher all my hopes.
Thou see how bravely I am clad (my boy)
In speaking garments, speaking pockets too.
The Lord Porta Rich (Grammario) is my name:
Go thou, and give that paper to the Lady,
Sing in her ear like to the amorous Lute,
Set forth my name in a Stentorian tone;
I Will second thee my self in person presently:
Be gone.

I Will do my utmost (Sir)


It is a high, brave thing to have th'repute
Of complete villain, perfect, absolute.

Sir, your Lord no doubt is every way accomplished:
And I Will assure you, finds far more regard
From me, in the reception of this paper,
Then any personage of honor hitherto
Could ever boast, though earnestly endeavored.

Madam, if you did know who seeks your love,
You would -- he comes himself.

Madam, I hope my boldness shall find pardon,
And my affectionate zeal plead my excuse.
Distribute those few Diamonds, and Pearl Bracelets
Unto the Ladies that attend this Excellency.

My Lord your honor sets too high a rate
Upon so mean a beauty as is mine

You are sole Empress of all worth,
Command my state, my person and my life.

Your honor is too courteous to your handmaid,
Please you, this night, to let your presence grace
My homely Table, your honors candor must
Apologize for my rude entertainment.

Excellent creature, ever command your vassail.


Lights there for my Lord; lights --


They are all gagged and bound.


As safe as my Lord Hind in his mistress arms.


Are they in bed together?


To my knowledge,


We shall soon part their struglings.


Thieves, thieves,


Thieves,


Murder, murder.


What saucy devils interrupt our joys?
What mean these clamours, speak upon your lives?

Alas! my Lord the house is robbed.


Oh, I am quite undone --


You see how we are sanguin'dore
Fighting for to prevent such outrages:

My leg is almost cut in sunder, oh --


Be not discomforted (dear Lady)
Every man mount his steed, and take his Arms;
My self too, will along: accursed mischance;
To horse, to horse; you Lady to your bed.

Oh me!


Why this is bravely done my Bullies;
Thus do the Gods sell all for industry,
And what is not got by hell-bred Villainy?
Conscience they talk on; conscience is free,
Worst conscienc'd men, these times, best thrivers be;
As't please the Thra^^an Boreas to blow
So turns our ayrie conscience to and fro.

TWere well for the great Grandees of the earth
(My fellow Furies) were there no worse Feinds
In pitchie Bara thrum then we: Oh how
The Bores and Bumpkins of this Shire do dread us
No less then twelve already are run mad.

Me thinks I like my transmutation well,
Only my tail is too, too troublesome --

Fronti nulla Fides
Mistagogus, What mean these prodigies?
Where is your vice or virtues habites now?
For sustine pro nunc does bend his brow.

You (Parson) now are in your native weeds,
Black best becomes your swarthy function
Whose Doctrine (for the most part) damns more souls
Then Lucifer by all his stratagems.

Oh, our Scout comes merrily.


A prize, prize, a prize --


The news?


The Indies salley toward us;
An Alderman of York quite gilded over,
His servants and his horses groan with gold,
Are journeying this way.

Couch close, my doughty deviss,
Lets seize upon them with as winged have
As real Demons at the hour of death
Hurrie a vicious soul to Tartarus.

Who would not be a Devil for an hour,
To be a man of money twelve months after --?

The Alderman (poor wretch) begged for his soul;
His innate guilt; fear of assured damnation
Made him forget petitioning for his pelf.
Quoth he, I smell sulphur, and reaking brimstone.
Soot, stinking soot: Oh hell, how hot art thou!

S^ulto um plena sunt omnia.
An ass in's foot-cloth; it is no sin to gull him;
He I thank heaven that his own chain did not choke him,
And praise the devil for's deliverance:
He Will soon recover all by his collusions,
Abatements, stoppels, inhibitions.
Heavy paced jade, dull pated jobbernoul,
Quck in delays, checking with vain control
Fair Justice course, vile necessary evil,
Smooth seeming saint, yet damned incarnate Devil.

Well said my man of art, and mystic science:
I know this Alderman and his Lawyers case;
I fee'd him one, and he cudgeld my case,
For which I vowed revenge, and have perfotm'd it.
Now every one resume his pristine form;
Our next scence lies in Kent; thither lets hie.
Me thinks I feel a civil war within me,
Egging me on for to proceed from this,
And get the substance of celestial bliss;
My soul often calls his Parliament of sense,
But still the guilty have pre-eminence:
For my souls better part so feeble is,
So cold and dead is, my Sinder^sis,
That shadows by odd chance sometimes are got;
But oh! the substance is respected not.
Come let us away.

Are we not finely fitted (fellow mendicants)
For a days prentiship to the begging trade?
O sad account! we that were wont to speak
In smoke and thunder, STAND -- UPON YOUR LIVES,
Must now petition for a piece of coin.

Tut,
Our begging is like that the Persians used
Of old unto their eager God of fire,
When with a flaming torch they did descend
Unto some river, and protest to quench
Th'a spiring God, in case he did deny
To grant their wishes. Oh, I have't ad unguem,
The Bard of Bednal green was nothing to me,

Eo Claudus, et Aegrotus sum,
This is the garb men of my cloth must take to,
Since every Sales-man writes himself Sacer dos.
Stand close, and obsecrate with Rhumatick eyes,
Here comes the Patron we must plunder.

A fine morning this is.


Oh that my wife had born us company; good soul, she loves to hear the Cuckoo
sing, especially in the winter


So does mine, indeedla.


Bless your good worships in your minds and your bodies, at home and abroad, in
bed and at board, No troubles toss ye
Nor no hare cross ye;
No succubus ride ye,
No false fire guide ye;
Please to distribute your charity amongst a company of poor maimd men --


Deprived of their limbs for the cause of their Country, whose legs and hands
remain as Trophies, in France, Spain, Aragon and Apulia


In Turkey, in Russia, in Naples and Muscovia


In the Adriatic and the Bal^ick Seas.


Supposito quolibet sequitur qu idlibet,
For your own sakes whose rewards shall be glorious,
Extend with liberal minds, and willing hands,
What both becomes your oppulency, and our indigency.

Hey day! What bold beggars are these?


What Country men are they? They speak all several Languages.


They are men of China I think.


Truly friends the times are so hard, and we so burthend, that verily, yea and
nay, we are scarce able to furnish our wives with a competent number of silk
gowns, lawn smocks, gold laces, beaver hats, silver hilted fans, Flanders
laces and other necessaries, without which, all honest men know we cannot
subsist


He speaks truth my brethren.


Zounds what dogs are these -- Come ye counterfeiting Coxcombs Discover,
discover: (Mercator) brought forth 6. hundred pounds to expiate a debt you owe
at Hogsden here


Take all (Sir) so you will spare my life.


Alas, i would rather overthrow thy wife.


What do you linger ye pair of Puttocks? Come, lighten, lighten.


Oh Lord (sir!)


Woe and alas!


Now each man lay his hand upon his mouth:
Mum, not a word upon your lives.
Away my Blades, this must we do for gain,
Since as the ancient Sages truly tell,
"It Is better never to be, then not be well.

Me thinks (Sir) you do seem in this disguise,
Like lightning in the Keldar of a cloud:
Your visage (Sir) is not least legible,
There is a Libel in your very dress.

Well sung the Roman Bard, that all things sublunary
Of worth do hang on very slender strings.

Nothing's more ticklish then the state of Kings:
Tall Caedars often are torn up by the roots
By blustering Boreas, when the humble shrub
Sits safe, exalting to behold their ruin.

I know as well all bodies politic
As those are humane, have their Dates and Deaths.
The Romans first had Kings, whose rule took end
In Yarquins fall; Consuls then sat at helm,
Swaying the Argoser of all the world,
Until Augustus leaped into the throne,
Making all stoop to single sovereignty:
Thus have all things terre strial their Dates,
The greatest Emperors, and greatest States,
The Lamps of Heaven, the Planets change above,
The Sun from his Diurnal Arch does move;
Air does sometime to fire or water run,
And fire an earthly habit does put on,
That men asleep, rockt by felicity,
That vainly dream here of Eternity,
May wake and see, since humane and Divine
Things taste mutation, it is nor strange it is Mine.

(Sir) I Am acquainted well with all these parts;
All England is, but as More fields to me,
Make me your guide (Sir) and never doubt your safety;
For though to others I have been untrue,
Let me be hanged if I prove false to you.

Our Authors Invention would not admit delay,
But strait produced new Plots, t'inlarge this play;
And thinking to write what is fancy had commended,
One comes and tells him, Hind was apprehended:
Whereat amazed he bids his friend adieu,
And forth he is gone, to inquire if the news be true.

