HIs Majesty after the Land Solemnity, (and returning to Whitehall, with the
Duke of York, and others His Nobility) is pleased to take a Balcony toward the
Water, in expectation of this Triumph

The Ordering of which is thus:

GREAT SIR!
INvited from our Princely Bower by Fame,
(Who ever waited on Your Royal Name)
And to complete the Wonder of this day,
(To which the Worlds Eye does a Tribute pay)
Neptune (sole Sovereign of the Seat) is come
To give Your Majesty a Welcome home;
After the Lands Caresses we would do,
Something (though weak) that might be talked of too.
At such a Greet the Elements Conspire,
And Body into Joy, Earth, Air, and Fire:
Your Actions have created Wonders (Sir)
Converted Time, Astonished Bumazer;
Convinced the Atheist in a powerful sense,
Who never till now did own a Providence:
This is the Hand of Miracle, which we
Have often wished, and now rejoice to see.
Be pleased (then) to accept what here we bring,
Although a rude, yet Peaceful Offering.
The Tower is the Emblem of Your Peoples Love,
From whose united Strength Your Actions move:
The Wales (the Seas Levyathans) are those
That were to God, Your Self and Country Foes;
Who to maintain their Monstrous Bulk, pursue
Not the Barque only, but the Traffic too;
By which Trade perished, all Commerce was barred,
And War too rude burdened Our Realm too hard.
Yet from that ill-contriv'd Circumference
We find a Center, and derive from thence
A Rock, out of whose Barren Womb does spring
The Royal Oak, a Shelter for a KING:
The Laurel shall no more its Virtue boast,
Since that the Oak deserves the Glory most,
And Consecrated ought to be to Jove,
Producing both the Effects of Peace and Love.
The Fairies in a Ring shall 'bout it dance,
Inscribing Honey soit qui mal y pense:
The Poets with Phaebean Lyricks Sing
The Actions and the Fame of Britains KING.

Which ended, the several Figures on the Water, as that of the Tower, Whales,
and the rest, become a sudden Flame; as though the Elements of Water and Air
had been invited to the Celebration of His Majesty's Coronation. Many other
excellent Fireworks are presented both on the Water and in the Air, being the
Designments of Mr. Zacheus Juat, Gunner of one of His Majesty's Ships

Thus I have given you a true Relation of the Night Triumphs presented to, and
much approved by His Most Gracious Majesty, he having already seen the Model
thereof

Thine, John Tatham.

