HEaven where is thy Vengeance?
Can thou endure this Mockery?

We thank you all. But why Agathocles
Appears such trouble on thy brows, are we
Unwelcome to thy wishes?

How Sir! Pardon me.
Who dares say you are?
You are my King, -- Is it not so Gentlemen?
The Rays that from your Brothers Diadem
Gilded this Kingdom are put out, and now
From you our rising Sun, we must expect
A Vertuall fervor. Obedience is my safety.
My wishes! trifles, what may you not Command?
If you but will, my life is not my own.
One frown may Rivet me, I am designed
To be but what you please, and when, no longer.
I am your poor Submissive.

You Misconstre
The power of Kings, they dare not but be just.
That Crown can never sit fast that takes it is rise
From others ruin.

Out Imposture --

My Lords I could have wished
The Peoples and your Loves had spared this solemnity
Until another time, a time that might
Have proved more fit for Triumph; for though Heaven
Has wreathed our Brows with Victory, our thoughts
Are not at peace.

Nor ever will be til
By their continual motion they have brought
All into Public ruin.

The Care of the Common safety
O'rwhelms our Joy and makes it seem unseasonable.
Repose after so long a toil of War would be
Perfume unto our Senses, but we must not
Prefer our own before the Peoples quiet.

Machivell thou art an Ass, a very Ass to him

My Lords, you are my witnesses,
The Public wrong, and not Ambitious hopes
Of Government, Oblieg'd me to this Quarrel
(The Peoples and not mine) against my Brother;
The Justice of which cause gave us Success.
Heaven knows, had he not bin their Enemy,
I should have emptied every vein I have
To Have served him. Nature and Duty held
Strong Conflicts in my blood, Nature promoting
One while my Brothers right, until my Duty
Unto my Country with Diviner Reason
O'reame me, and discovered the sad Scene
Of a sinking People, and a rising Tyrant.

Does Heaven hear this, and punishes not?

For my part, my Lords,
Though the affection of the People Circles
My Temples with a Crown, I shall not wear it
Longer than they 'steem me worthy.

Most singular Prince.

Most singular Devil. --

My Lord Archbishop,
You are the Church's Vine, and we the Elm
Of the Commonwealth, our flourishing Estates
Depend on one another; by Heaven's hand
We are Contracted, and must share all fortunes,
Or good, or bad. The Jewels of a Crown
Retain not Luster longer than they have
Virtue from th'Church, and that she is glorious;
Nor can she be so longer than we are so,
Her strength and welfare does consist in ours.
Let not this sudden change
Possess her with a fear of her Ecclips.
She Has a Protector now, that will expose
His life a Sacrifice to preserve her Purity.
We shall not be remiss to satisfy
What lies on our part toward her, and what
From her belongs to us we need not intimate,
You have a Sense my Lord, can reach at things
And their Necessities.

My Duty shall not be wanting, my gracious Lord.

The Churchman will turn Pander to him.

My Lords,
We Are not insensible of the Peoples burden
By keeping up our Armies, but necessity
That makes men Act what they would not, Compels it;
We are not yet secured against the Malice
Of our late vanquished Brother, there is a faction
That waits an opportunity to befriend him,
Beside his hopes in Italy; those clouds over,
We doubt not but a fair day will give birth
Unto the Peoples happiness and ours.
In the mean time my Lords be it your Care
To stop the current of their Cries, and keep
Us fair in their opinion.

As Hel's Projector.
Down, down big heart, thou wilt hang me else.

My Lord,
Let Reason moderate your Passions,
They are two violent, and may prove your Enemies.

Mazares wants not Hands.
Nor I a Heart
To dare his worst; oh Epecides

I have lived too long to see this day.
My Lords, we know
Crowns are but glorious burdens, and the weight
Requires more heads than one to bear it up.
You are the approved Pilots of the State,
Acquainted with all Creekes, and Rocks where danger
Hides his destroying-head, and wisely can
Steer her, should the Malice of a Foreign Foe
Swell to a Tempest, or Malignant breaths
At home threaten her Ruin; on your faiths
Depends ours and her safety.

Most gracious Sir,
You have outdone even Expectation? and
The Beams of Virtue that shoot from you
Outshine the Glory of your Diadem,
And bind our lives unto your Fortunes.

May we own our lives no longer
Than they perform those offices of Duty
Your Virtues do Command them to.

We owe much to your Loves,
And shall engrosse a time to pay the Debt
Your Merits call upon us; we will divide
The happiness, if any wait upon
A Crown, amongst you.

When he is warm in's Seat,
They shall as little dare to claim his Promise,
As the poor Crane his reward from the Lion,
When he had pulled the Bone out of his throat.

Restrain your self,
There Is little Revenge in words, but words may be
Revenged, be advised.

May never Care breed feavors in your blood,
Nor troubles raise a Palsy in your Scepter;
May still Success attend your Enterprises,
And Conquests beget Conquests, till you write
Your Self the Worlds great Monarch.

May Heaven's eye
Keep Sentinel while you repose, that no
Traiterous Attempts may reach your Sacred Person.

Now may the Groans of dying men, the cries
Of Widows, Orphans, and defloured Virgins,
Together with his Brother's wrongs continually
Keep him awake, till with distracted rage
(For want of Rest) he does become his own
Dire executioner.

What means this? Agathocles?

I have bin at my Prayers too.

We thank you, and shall
Endeavor to deserve so far,
You shall not have Cause to repent them.

I believe no less.

Lead on my Lords,
With upright Care we shall discharge our trust;
Kings are no longer Kings, than they are just.

My Lord Epecides, a word,
The King may spare us two; I may presume
We are as little needed as regarded.
If that thy looks deceive me not, thou art
Yet free from this disease, this Itch of Honor,
Which so transformes us into Servile flattery.
Art swelled with lofty thoughts?

They reach no higher
Than the Public good, which they devoutly wish,
Though want a power to Compass.

Thou Art honesty it self;
And to thy Bosom as my Sanctuary,
My Soul shall fly to ease it self of what
Would burst me to keep longer.

My Lord, you may
Be confident I have a Soul as big
With Grief as you, that fain would be delivered,
If Reason would turn Midwife.

False Cleander
Has made the Field drunk with his Countrey's blood,
To set up an Usurper.

It is pretended
The Peoples Pressures and continual Calmours
Enforced the War.

Kindled by the fire
Broke from Mazares bosom, whose Ambitious
Desire of Rule, bred the ill humors in
The easily corrupted Multitude,
Who, led by their pernicious hopes, that he
Would bring on better days, gave breath unto
Their Monstrous fury, and like a deluge,
Brake forth and sanke the Fortunes of Evander:
That he poor Prince, having no other Arc
Of Preservation than his Innocence,
And faith he had in's friends, did fly to them
Whose shelter served him but for a short time,
For they with him at last were overwhelmed.
But Epecides be thou confident,
Though Hell has furthered the Usurpers Plot,
And smoothed it with success, Vengeance will reach him.
Though heaven be slow it is punishment is sure.

Hear but Cleander,
Philistus, Adulanter, and the rest,
And they will tell you Providence and Justice
Sat on their Weapons points to punish Tyranny;
And that our Kingdom by Mazares wisdom,
Will flourish in a far better Estate,
Than in Evanders time.

Ambition wants not snares
To Catch Vulgar Credulity, and carry
On their Designs clear to the end they aim at.
They are the Canes and Truncks through which the Usurper
Speaks to promote his purposes, and blast
All good in's Brother, and Ecclips his right.
Is not Planetius, the first bold Traitor,
Of Mona made Provincial? Is not Cleander
As big with hopes and Expectation?
Does not Philistus fawn, and Court to out
Missellus the Provincial of Vallis de Noto.
Credit such Sycophants?

Missellus is Noble,
And if Mazares look not well about him,
Evander may have an after Game to Play,
Missellus was his Creature.

Where ever he be,
Though fortune left his Party, he retains
A Mind invincible.

No question but
The State was much distempered, and Evander
Was not without his faults.

People disposed for Change,
Survey the Vices of their Prince through Optics
That rather multiply than lessen them:
And what is in themselves but Criminal,
Is in their Prince held horrid, as the Symptom
To the disease of Tyranny.

And dare correct;
That in their Prince they would not in themselves
Have taken notice of.

But allow there were
Some things might grieve the People; Wise Experience
Gives us to know that in the lopping of Trees,
The skillful hand prunes but the lower Branches,
And leaves the Top still growing to Extract
Sap from the Root, as meaning to Reform,
Not to Destroy. I tell thee Epecides,
The Excess of what was good in Prince Evander,
Might Stock the barren breast' of the Usurper.

Men never rate their goods so highly
As when they are robbed of them. It is some ease
To our afflictions, that we can thus vent
Our Griefs to one another, for we must
Despair of other remedy.

Very true,
If we continue Children, and adore
The Rod corrects us, kiss it till we smart for it,
Enthrone base Fear in Valors royal Seat,
Let it Lord o'r our Spirits, till our blood
Forsake its heat, and become Ice: But if
We do retain the Glory of our Ancestors,
(Whose Ashes will rise up against our dullness;)
Shake off our Tamenesse, and give way to Courage,
We need not doubt (inspired with a just rage)
To break the necks of those that would yoke ours.

I but --

Those Buts destroy us; are you willing
To sit in the dark and never see the Sun;
With a besotted Patience see your goods
Rifled, and your Inheritance taken from you,
Unless you to secure his quiet will
Part with your own, and by compliance banish
The peace your Conscience yet is happy in?

You know my Spirit's not so chill
But I would know a way, prescribe you one
That Is passable, I shall not only run
My Fortunes with you, but make all the friends
And nearest Allies I have as ready minded
To do you service.

To a Resolved Mind
Nothing seems difficult -- Archias has a Noble gallant Spirit.

What then?

He ever was a friend to Virtue, and's of Mazares line too.

Unfold the Mystery.

What would you say if -- he is wellbelov'd and active.

Do you suspect me?

No, but hold here is some upon us.

Which is the Lord Philistus or Cleander, either will serve.

What is your business?

I Have Letters to the King.

Whence came you?

From Messina.

How fares the Lord Planetius?

His Honor is in health, I Would feign be discharged.

What news, what news, we will bring you to the King.

Extreme good Gentlemen, the late Tyrant after his defeat going for Italy, was
surpised by some of Tyche, in the Province of Vall^s de Noto, killd, and cast
into the River; a death too good for him


So Sir --

Oh forbear -- But hear me friend is this news certain?

My Lord Planetius the Provincial of Mona had it so Sir, and he has sent the
same unto the King* I can say no more on it Sir, please you to bring me to those
Gentlemen


There Is enough in Court to show you, you may walk thither Sir --

I could have done that without all this do Sir --

Passion's too much your Enemy.

Dog! a death too good for him?

What think you now on th'businesse you were upon?

I am beside my self, my Courage leaves me,
And Reason tells me now I must be tame.
The King --

Were not the Villains found.

I do not know and't please your Majesty.
The King seems to be troubled at this News.
I Will change my Note -- it is like they were,
For w'heard the Provincial of Vallis de Noto had
Appointed the death of some body.

He did but Justice then; Oh Philistus
And you my honored Lords, our Grieses want utterance;
He was our Brother, though our Countries Enemy,
And they have taken away a part of us
That sent him hence; It was a Deed (though Heavens
Just hand was in it) we cannot but Lament.
Your Pardon Supreme powers.

Most pious Prince.

Blame us not my Lords. We say again
He was our Brother, and We cannot stop
The Course of Nature.

Can this he real!

He was a Gracious Prince, there is the truth on it.
I could weep too for him.

How you Villain?

Why the King is not offended with me I hope? alas I have Nature in me too,
good, Virtuous Prince, Evand^r


Have thou a mind to be hanged?

How! Is the Wind at that door. No Sir, not for ever a dead Prince in
Christendom; your Majesty may spare your tears, for in truth and verity he
was but so, so


Friend did not say
That the Actors were punished by Missellus.

So I heard an't like your Highness.

It Is strange
Planetius writes not so, but it is very likely;
Missellus has in many things been seen
Ready and Active for him, and no doubt
Would now --

Come, Come, Missellus grows too popular,
Your Majesty may think on some more faithful.

We guess your meaning -- Philistus,
We shall dispatch you upon some affairs,
As soon as we can shake this sadness off,
And our Mind's fit for business.

It becomes my Duty to wait your
Highness pleasure.

Fellow attend our Secretary for a Confirmation of the Provinciallship of Mona
to Planetius

Come my Lords.

Begone so soon my Lord? you are hardly entered
My Father house. Though the entertainment comes
Short of your Merits, My Lord, beleev't you are welcome
To poor Harmonia.

Thou Art rich in all that is good,
And that is a Dower Queens would be glad to boast of.
Since thy descent to love me, I Am exalted
Above a Monarch's happiness.

And part so soon?
You have some other Mistress whose heaven
Depends upon your Visit.

Pretty Jealousy,
How sweetly it becomes her; Believe me dearest,
By the blessed hopes I have in thee, Not any
Beauty in Cicily (if there can any be
Besides thy self; for in thee is the full
Perfection of all Beauty met) has part
Of the least thought of mine.

You shall not go though yet.

Thy Father -- will thou now License me to go;
I Will see thee e're the Sun be six hours older.

My Lord Archias you have honored me
Exceedingly by this your Visit. I hope my coming
Does not remove you hence.

My good Lord,
Excuse me I beseech you, did not Business
Of much Concernment call me hence, I should
Account that time well spent wherein I might
Serve you and your fair Daughter.

Pleasure your self my Lord.

I am your Lordships Servant -- adue Sweet.

Harmonia,
I guess this Young Lord loves thee,
His often Visits promise some such business;
But I Would not have you Countenance it.

Why I beseech you Sir?
You have bin pleased to lavish forth his praises
Beyond the Common Character; I Have heard you say
(With Pardon Sir) he had much Virtue in him.

And has so, but he cannot bring his Heart
T'affect this King, although he be his Kinsman.

That is no Crime worthy my Notice Sir,
Much less my disrespect. Pray give me leave
To use him but with that Civility
Becomes the Education of your Daughter.

My intents
Fly higher to advance thee, if I live,
And that the King perform his Royal word,
(As that he dares not but do) thou shall stand
In Competition with a Queen for Greatness.
Mazares is too weak a Politician,
To think my vast Soul can be hemmed within
The Circle of a Province, when a Kingdom
Will scarce contain it. No, I do but take
This as a Spot of Earth to what I aim at.
I mean to Match thee Girl unto some Prince,
By whose Assistance I Will reach the Ascendent,
The Royal Seat Harmonia, And then
We are thy Princely Father: Dos't not Noise
Rarely my Girl, the very Sound inspires
My Soul with flames of Majesty -- Go on Cleander,
'Till Neighboring Princes wondering at thy Fate,
With trembling Scepters dread their own Estate.

PHilistus sir,
Sit Adulanter -- who waits there?

We an't like your Grace.

Bring us Wine,
We are disposed to drown our Brothers Memory,
And its appendent Sorrows in a full
Bowl of rich Wine.

Done like your Princely self.

What should we
Contract our Youth to Cares for, waste the heat
Beats in our agile veins, and draw upon
Our head a Snowy-Perrywig before
Age claims it? We are resolved to make
Our blooming Years no Prey for Melancholy.

You are our Sun, and we the Infant Plants
That take life from you; when your Brow is Clowded
We droop and Pine, as wanting heat; your Highness
Now shows your self in Glory; and our heads
That lately were pressed down with discontent
Look up to bless the Change.

Your Highness put
Us all in fear you would Convert your Court
Into a Monastery.

Ha, ha, ha, into a Mouse-trap rather.
Philistus to thee. -- Fellow let not any
Enter the Presence if thou regard'st thy safety.
It Is hoped our Subjects, will allow us a time
Of Mirth after our toil for them.

Whether they will or not, your Majesty has power to take it.

How ever we seemed to take our Brothers death,
'Thas brought on our security, for such
As durst before speak loud and big, now dare not
Be seen to Whisper against us.

It Is a point of Policy,
High as your Highness safety to keep them
At such an Awful distance; there is Epecides --

A Close and cunning Sophister, he carries
A fire within him scarce to be discerned.

Agathocles comes not much short of him.

He has a daring Soul, and does attract
The lewd Licentious People, as the fire
That draws ill Vapors to it, but we are resolved
He and the rest of's Insolent Crew shall meet
Our Justice if they Submit not.

Your Majesty's brow
Is too serene, something of Wrath there seated
Would seem far better.

Where Is our Secretary.

Call the Kings Secretary

Have done the Patent we gave Order for?

It Is ready for your Majesty's Signing.

Give us Ink, -- so -- Philistus,
We have Just cause to doubt Missellus faith too,
And therefore will remove him, and on thee
Confer the honor. He is seated like
A Thorn in The Heart of Cicily, and must be
Cut off lest he spread farther, and do gore us.
Take this as earnest of our Love to thee,
Whose Loyalty we are assured of.

Fame
Shall spread your Royal Bounty through the World,
And may leave to Be when I forget
To be your Highness Servant.

Cleander had
Our promise for it, but We do know him one
Of an unconstant Spirit, full of Spleen;
A Mind high and unbounded, and to drive
On his own ends, will enter into League
With Turk or Devil; therefore it is not safe
For us to lay a trust of so high consequence
On such a frail foundation, One whose faith
Complies with every Wind, and strikes his Sails
With every Tide and Change. But
You drink slowly. -- Come to thy
Good Journey.

The King is private.

I must speak with him.

Who Is that so loud there?

The Lord Cleander.

Tell him it is not our pleasure to be spoke with.

My Lord you hear the King.

My Business is of Concernment,
I will enter -- How Is this? surrounded
With his Flatterers; it is like to be
A State well governed.

Sir, you are Uncivil.

What mean you Royal Sir?

You Are saucy, We say again you are saucy.

How?

How durst you be so insolent?

I have deserved Sir better language from you.
My anger is too strong for my Obedience,
And will have the upper hand. I come
To claim your Royal word -- I am Cleander Sir,
Whose hand did seat the Crown upon your head Sir.

Provoke us not.

Good my Lord for your own safety.
You see the King is moved.

Moved! By heaven i will move him worse, tell me I Am Insolent.

And we shall punish it, if you go not the sooner.

I will not hence, and you shall hear me.

Go, you are impudent.

Am I so Sir?
You did not tell me so, when I did waste
Whole Nights, and spent my Spirits, to seduce
The People t^ your Party, and lost my blood
To serve you. I was not then --

Stir not in me
An Anger that will shake thee.

Whose head, whose heart, whose hand appeared till mine,
To make you what you are?

If we be King, Sir you shall feel there is
A power belonging to it. Where Is our Guard?
Take him away.

I beseech your Majesty.

Effeminate Lord, I scorn to own a life
At thy Petitioning. Tyrant do thy worst.
Is this the reward for all my services --
Sit with your crew of Vaulters, and Contrive
To turn your Cittadels to dancing schools
Or Stews fit for your purpose, till the Soldiery
Like to a sudden Tempest scour your follies,
And whip you to Repentance.

Away with him.

Come my Lord.

Yes I shall go -- Ungrateful Prince,
May all thy Brothers --

Stop's mouth -- away with him.
So we are rid of the Screech Owl, did you ever hear
Spleen better vented; All the Physicians of Palermo could not discover his
disease better than he has don't himself

And were I as your Majesty, I Would cure him
By the head for it.

It Is not safe yet, but if this
Tame him not,
We shall fly higher,

The Serpent spet at me too.

We Will have the venom from him or his life for it.

He has a Daughter of that Beauty, would thaw a Stoick's bosom,
She carries the Quintessence of Youth about her.

Art thou acquainted with her?

Though I am not, I want not Confidence,
If that may serve your Majesty.

Is she composed for Mirth?

She bears a fame for Virtue.

What should we do with her then? she is no Match for us.

If your Majesty have a Mind to her
I Will batter all her Virtues with your Glories;
And 'less an Host of Angels come to Guard her,
She shall not pass my purchase.

When you Storm her let not a Repulse or two
Make you draw off your Siege, the third Assault
Constrains her to Surrender.

I am not my Lord
To learn the Art of Courtship, I have more
Designs than one upon her.

We do like
The Law Lycurgus made, and will Ordain
The like amongst us; why should Youth be Curtailed
Of that delight Nature intended it?
Men's Wives shall have the liberty to choose
A friend to play the Husbands part sometimes.

Does your Majesty intend to Marry?

Marriage is but a Church Divise, that would
Prefer sobriety amongst the Virtues,
A stale unsavory thing; when as Variety
Gives life to every Sense, and does beget
An Appetite, when the other smothers it.
Adulanter try thy Skill, We shall reward it.

I warrant she is your Majesty's.

Come Philistus,
We Will bring thee on thy way, and lest Missellus
Should prove stiff Neck'd, and not yield his Obedience
To our Commands, our General shall send
With thee 5000. men to force Admittance.
Leontium, Tyche and Neapolis
Stand fast to us, and will assist you if
The Siracusians should stand out.

Your Majesty does enrich me with your Bounty.

Adulanter, We shall find employment worthy
Thy liking in Palermo; We will have
Thee near us.

Your Highness Vassal.

It Is fit,
Royality should maintain them which uphold it.

He is my Kiug, his Brother's death has made
His Title good, and I must bring my heart
Down to Obedience.

Then you begin to cool.

I Am not Convinced in Conscience that it is lawful
To Oppose the power now o'r us, since the hand
Of Heaven is in it, whose high Decrees we ought not
To question or dispute.

A happy Morning
Toth' Noble Lord Archias.

The like to your Honors.
You heard the news?

What is it my Lord?

Philistus is made Provincial of Vallis de Noto.

How likes Cleander it?

He Is otherwise Provided for, Committed
Upon displeasure Mazares has taken against him.

That Is news indeed.

What Cleander, the Magazine of Policy,
Is he blown up? Mazar^s only Atlas
That shouldered him into the Throne.

This is some State Gin, some trick Politic.

Beleev't it is true.

How can Mazares be without him?

Oh my Lord,
Mazares used Cleander as the Lame
Do their supporting Crutches, that is no longer
Than as they need 'em; when that they are able
To walk alore, they cast 'em from 'em.

Ha, ha, ha, I Am glad on it with all my heart.
Mazares never Acted a thing as yet
So near Commendable justice, Fair Astrea
May give it a just Plaudit.

But Consider,
If such who have ventured their part of Heaven
To do him service, are not free from's Tyranny,
Where rests our safety?

It is high injustice
So to reward him.

In the survey of Politickes,
Do find a Traitor otherwise rewarded?
Stands it with thy Discretion, to let loose
A Tiger, when thou have moved him into Anger?
No, it is a way both safe and full of Justice
To Chain such Danger up; had he done otherwise,
He had bin fitter rather to have ruled
A Sheephook than a Scepter.

Come you are too bitter,
Think on Cleander's Age, and lend your aid.

He should have known more virtue in his Youth,
And then his Age had now bin Tempest proof.

For my sake good my Lord, and for his Daughters.

I, now my Lord you speak, you are concerned in it.

Your own, and all our freedoms are concerned in it.
Shall we pay Duty and Obedience
To him, who does instruct us to Rebel
By his own President? are we to learn
How he Obtained the Scepter? or want we Sense
To feel how he imploies it? was it not
His own insinuating Tenet to
The People, ('against his Brother,) That the Virtue
And Justice of the Prince were the only Bonds
That bound the People to him, and when he
Should violate either, they were tied no longer?
Are we not Freemen then?

Highly requisite.

Where is the Common Right?
Our Just Inheritance? bought with the blood
Of our Indulgent Ancestors? whose Valor
Bounded the Royal Power so, it durst not
Spread beyond the Acts of Piety and Justice.

See what Love, and Women can do!

My Lord Archbishop you are happily come
To Contribute your advice.

My honored Lords,
The safety of your Persons frees my Soul
That lately was a Slave to fear, and Jealousy.

I Churchman, 'twas your Fears, and Jealousies,
Heaved first at our foundation. Cicily had bin
Clear from infection, had not your hot lungs
Spet the Contagion. It was you gave Reins
To the Licentious People, that Like Negroes
Shot their envenomed Darts at the Rays of Majesty,
Whose careful heat did warm them.

You mistake,
We aimed at no such thing, but to discharge
Our Duties to our Country.

And you have proved
The most undutifull'st of all her Children.
And finding now the ends of your Ambition
Of being Cardinal is clear laid open,
By which your Pride is like to be Obscured,
You do begin to belch forth fresh Sedition,
And Create new Distempers, 'cause Mazares
Will not do what you would have him.

I come not Sir
To bandy words, the World knows what I did
Was in Relation to the Churches Peace,
How ever you term it; But so full of Poison
I find the Gilded Pills of his Professions,
That plainly I must tell you without fear,
I heartily do wish those hands that were
Employed to Seat him o'r us, had bin used
To put him in his Grave.

Or bin lop'd off
Before they had Contracted such an ill
Upon our Country:

There Is no time too late
To lanch the Ulcer and give ease unto
The groaning People, if my Lord Agathecles
Will call to Mind his death, that whets the Instrument,
Whose Precious Memory will give life to all
Our undertakings.

Come, my Lord, I Will have
The Bishop and you reconciled. We Will to
Cleanders house, where the poor Lady Mourns
Her Fathers Absence, there we will Consult
On some way to Obtain his and our Freedoms.

Let not the Churchman be in it, and then
Doubt not but we shall make all right again.

This is her walk, I hope you do not faint
At the Design, now it is so near attempting

Yes I warrant you, as though she were the first Wench we have had Occasion to
make use of

Why what do you take us to be? Milksops, I tell you Sir, we are Gentlemen in
the first place, Soldiers in the second, and men in the last place

Good reason the last should take place of the first then; but stay,
Yonder Is the Bird for which we wait, I Will try
If she will come to hand, if not, your Net
Shall noose her into Tameness -- stand close.
Hail Madam, Heaven's Epitome, on whose
Blessed smiles the happiness of Kings depend,
Pleasure and health attend you.

I thank you Sir,
But here it is unseasonable where sorrow
Has it is Predominance.

I bring you Comfort,
If you but please to honor the Address
With kind Acceptance.

Has my Ruthlesse fortune
More Miseries to heap on me, that she
Presents me with such shadows of her favor?

The King, to whom your Father's life is forfeit,
Throws both it, and his own into your lap
If you will be so wise as to receive 'em.

Could I express a thankfulness beyond
The Duty that I owe 'n my Prayers for him,
It should fly to him, pray be pleased to teach me
The way to it.

Fame has bin busy
In giving to the King an Estimat
Of your Perfections, whose high Value fills
The Exchequor of his Breast, and it is your Love
Must free the Heart your Bounty has subdued.

I Am ignorant of your meaning.

To be his Mistres.

Or in plainer Terms, which shows the truth on it,
To be his Whore.

Fie; that is too Common;
Consider Madam, he that Courts you is
Your King, who may Compel where he entreats,
And you will forfeit your Allegiance if
You should deny him.

To the Gods I should,
Durst I presume to Grant it; if my Father
Must not enjoy his life, but on the Terms
Of my dishonor, th'duty that I ow
To Heaven and Goodness will Implead against
The Bonds of Nature, which can Challenge but
The life it gave, and that I Will offer up
To Ransom his.

That will not serve the turn,
You must to Court.

I Will first go to my grave.

Nay then adue Complement, and to your business fellows.

What mean you?

To hide your Blushes Madam.

Help, help, help.

Stop her mouth.

I am o'rcome in Reason, and do Crave
Your Lordships pardon.

My Lord you have my Heart
At your disposing.

This Reconcilement's handsome.

So, the field's our own, take up your Bag and Baggage, March fair and softly,
When we come to Court we will share the Booty.
A Plague upon it, down with your load, and make an Honorable Retreat.

'Twas Adulanter -- what is this, It moves,
Your help my Lords, -- Ah! it is Harmonia.

What Monstrous Stratagem had they upon her?

Air is a Blessing, oh, let me have more on it.

Dear Madam speak your wrongs, and we will right you,
If the best blood in Cicily can do it.

My life, and Honor, (far more precious) were
Designed for Slaughter.

How Madam! by whom?

By him who, should protect the Innocent,
The Lawless King; whose Causeless wrath upon
My Father, nothing could appease unless.
I made sale of my Virtue, and my Youth
To satisfy his Lust,

Whose fire we will quench
With his own blood; be confident Harmonia
Thy Father shall outlive his Power and Cruelty.

If we take not this edge off, We shall have
Our Wives and Daughters made the Subjects of
Our scorn and shame, and be squeek'd out in Ballads
For honorable Cuckolds, Princely Panders.
Whose Soul is so besotted to his fear
He can contract it to a Minutes Patience?

Not I.

Nor I; sure he does think the Gods
Are all asleep, or have forgot to punish.

Hence Patience, thou Fools virtue;
I Will shake off
Thy Coldness, with the Witchcraft of Obedience,
Who have so long kept me in Cells of Slavery
I could not see the Glory of my Freedom.

We Will kindle all our Vigor ^t thy flame,
And teach our knees to Pay their homage to
No Power but thine; My Lords if that we be
All of one Mind, cry, long live Archias.

I wait not for that Dignity believe me,
All my Ambition is to free this Lady
From the ghastly fears that haunt her, and give liberty
Unto her happiness, by her Fathers Freedom.

Which to Atchieve (my Lord) receive the Power
Heaven and We offer you; Monreall is
Your own already.

And the Agrigentines
Proclaim you in my Voice their lawful King.

And all the Citizens in Palermo speak
The like in me -- Long live Archias.

Long live Archias.

My Lords forbear, Mazares lives.

Abhorred of the Gods, and it is but Justice
To take him off.

Heaven fit me for the trust
You a throw on me, and now Harmonia,
Sweet Empress of my Soul, receive thy Archias,
Who must not know a Joy but what thou shar'st of;
Cleander freed, We shall request your hand,
To join our hearts, My Lord.

Where Virtue keeps
Her Court, the Gods are Guests; your
Choice is Heavenly.

I was even now the wretched'st of all living,
And now am lifted to a happiness
That Queens would kneel to purchase --
My Dear Lord.

My Heaven on Earth.

Think on your Business Sir,
The perfecting of that gives length unto
Your Amorous Days.

Whose flourishing we wish.

My Lords, my thanks, with your advice I move,
No Engine is so powerful as your love.

The finest coming'st Lady that your Highness
Could wish to meet withal, and rarely handsome.

And did accept our proffer?

As Greedily
As Bees suck sweetness from the fragrant Stock
Of Flora's Early bounty.

I Am all flame,
By Heaven not one of them shall escape my fury.

Nay, I think I had like to have
Mauled two of them,
Had not the Church man with his Clublaw Precepts
Beat down my Resolutions.

Damb his Daubing,
He is that Knack, Religous-Mountebanck,
A Box of frenzied-zeal which he applies
On all Occasions, to all sorts of sores,
And wracks the Patient with more fear and Torment
Than Hell it self can put him to.

A Coat
He wears that has bin turned seven times.

Which we will turn o'r's Ears, and then turn them
Oppose our Pleasure; He, and all the rest
Of his Confederates shall know we wear
Our Crown not for a Cipher, and our Scepter
Shall prove a scourge to them; they have awaked
A fury that no Prayers can allay.
Haste to the Governor Icelis, tell him
It is our will Cleander's Spirit leave
The World with speed and privacy. Proclaim
Our Cockbrain'd Cosen, and the Piebal'd Churchman,
Agathocles and Epecides Trayters;
And such as shall take them five thousand Talents.
So violent I grow in my desire,
I must enjoy it or set all on fire.

Pursued by my bad Fate, whose Cruelty
I knew would not admit of any Mean
Should it once seize on me, I struck my self
Into Disguise, by whose Obscurity
I came to Tyche, there, gave out my hand
Had killed Evander, at which, some that were
My Enemies gave tokens of their Sorrow;
Others, who thought their Rising not secure
'Less by my Irrecoverable fall,
Highly applauded me. At last a Remnant
Of my poor friends, Resolved to pay their last
Service unto my Memory, though with
The loss of their Estates and lives, did lay
Plots to destroy me as the horrid Murderer,
And I, not daring to open my self
To them, for fear I should let in the fury
Of my stern Adversaries, did steal away
With the Nights silence.

Though the beginning of
This Story melts my Soul, Yet Providence
Is seen in the winding up, which did direct
Your Highness hither, where you are as secure
From danger as your thoughts are in your Bosom.

We doubt it not.

You dead, what can Mazares
Pretend to keep his Armies up? this, I Will
Possess the People with, and stir them to
Propose their straight disbanding, which if Granted,
The Course of Fate is turned, and he left Naked,
And shelterless from any Storm may happen.
On the other side if he denies it, then
The Incensed People like a sudden Earthquake
Removes him, were his Pride more Mountanous
Than are his Vices Monstrous; thus on all sides
I Will hem him in, so he shall know no way
To escape your Vengeance; be but pleased to suffer
Under this Clowd awhile, and you will appear
More glorious to your Peoples eyes and hearts,
When time presents a fitness for discovery.

Thou art our faithful Counselor, and We
Next to the Gods do ow our Self to thee.

We are not far from Syracuse, this Passage
Is the direct line to it, as the Map speaks.

My Lord, I hope your Honor will not show
Your self so much a Stranger to Designs
Of War, as to give them the advantage of
A Parley, but rush suddenly upon them,
And like a Torrent we will bear all before us,
There Is Soldier in it.

It is too rash advice
And must be slighted; Missellus is a Person
That Roughness will not work upon.

My Lord,
He is no Coward, and his Honor's linked
Unto his life, he that will seek the one,
Must venture for the other, or lose both.

If my desires effect but what they aim at,
I care not when, or how, it is purchased.
Haste you with the Kings Letter to Missellus,
Tell him it is my desire to keep the League
Of friendship 'twixt us, and without a bussle,
Which may let forth some blood, have him Surrender;
Tell him, it is no displeasure that the King
Has taken against him, that occasions his,
But to give ease unto his Age, and draw
Him nearer him at Court, where he shall find
The service of his Youth, in's latter days
Crowned with a peaceful Laurel, and content
Ad length unto his years.

I go my Lord.

Thimistius, March fair and softly, we shall be
Too soon upon them else; this cannot but
Insinuate a faith into him, to
Give way to my Admittance, since the offer
Carries so full a sense of fairness in it.

My Lord, he is not to learn this Principle,
Where Princes call back Honors done, the life
Is the next thing in Question.

Let the Fates
Contrive their worst against it, if Antanter
Bring us supplies from the Provincial
Of Mona, we will fire it but we will have it.

Well, my Lord, the Craft's in the Catching.

Do come to dare me Fellow?

I conceive
With favor of your Excellence, the Terms
Are very Civil, and no danger in them.

I shall reward his Subtle Modesty
If I but get him here, as I will you
The worthy Messenger, take's head off.

You dare not?

Thou art mistaken friend; away with him.
Oh that I could with as much ease destroy
All th'barbarous Enemies of my wronged Sovereign.
Make strong the Gates and Walls, and let the Fort
Hexapile be stoutly Manned, we will be
Prepared to whip the Boy and's Company.

The Gates are shut against us.

What think you now on it?

Beat a Parley.
How Is this? Philanders head?

Which you might have preserved upon his shoulders,
Had you given but regard unto my Counsel.
But you are Lordly-wise, and cause you can
Batter a Ladies fort with your fine Rhetoric,
You think the Town's your own, and men are bound
To bend unto your Complement, or trust
The Glass of your deceit.

It Is fine, affronted
By Greasy Buffe and Biscuit.

Some strong Water
To keep the thing from fainting, poor Young Man,
How pule he looks upon it.

Take thy reward.

Our Colonel slain.

Were there more living of his saucy Nature
I Would send them after him; Antanter what
Says the Provincial?

He Will do nothing Sir
Without a Warrant from the King, he says
He does believe there will be no such need,
Missellus will resign upon fair Terms.

But you see how it is?

I do indeed,
And sorrow that I see it -- How came Thimistius
By this his death?

That Lord's hand did it.

How?

Come, we will venture with the Men we have
To scale the walls.

We will not scale Sir.

So,
You will not, very good; do you see this head Sir?

And that body too Sir.

Let me have better Language or by Heaven
I Will make you as tame as these.

You cannot Sir.

How?

It Is not all
The strength you have in Feather or Perfume
Can fright me Sir; Your Amber Bracelets carry
Not half the Terror of Chained shot, nor is
Your Title Lord a Bulwark to defend you.

You Are a Rascal.
Come Soldiers March with me.

Not a Man stir,
There Is satisfaction to be given for
The life of that brave Man, which I will have
Or pay my own.

Gallant Major.

I shall not spare to give you Sir your due.

I Will not be backward in rewarding it.

You are Pot-valiant (Sir) it seems.

It Is past the Art of Man to make you so;
I am a Soldier Sir.

And must be beat
Into Civility, I Will make you know
There is a difference 'twixt us.

True indeed,
You can out-talke me.
How do you Sir?

You shall know by and by Sir --
I am lost.

Farewell thou Tyrant over Woman's flesh.
Take up Thimistius body, it shall have
An honorable burial, as for his
Let it remain a sport for the Siracusians.
The King I know will run besides himself
To hear on's Minions loss, but you I hope,
My friends and fellow Soldiers, will wade with me
Through all the Lakes of danger.

We Will never leave you.

Bravely resolved, and I will die with you.

They Are marched away; what is here Philistus body,
Our late Competitor? Why here is revenge
Strangely effected! See the fate of Traitors!
How wonderfully Heaven does bring about
Their Punishment! that like to Caniballs
The one does eat the other; bring it in;
My hate ends with his Life, and now my Charity,
Though he deserved it not, will give him burial.

Their Envy is Invincible, and the People
Time's Shittle-cocks) do bring unto your Gates
The hidious Shape of danger.

My deceit
Shall Rock that Monster into sleep, had it
More eyes than Argos.

It Is impossible,
The Agrigentines have thrown off Obedience;
Monreall is revolted; All your Castles
And strongs holds in Palermo are delivered
Into their hands; the Magistrates join with them.

Go use thy best Endeavors Adulanter
TO appease the People, turn right Courtier, promise,
And we will perform at Leisure.

Your Highness
I hope is not in Earnest; I go amongst 'em!
Have you a Mind to have my Brains beat out?
I am your Pimp they say, (Sir,) am so hated,
The very Boys throw Turap tops at me.

Alas poor Adulanter, we wi'l blow
This Storm away never fear it, Let our Guard
Be doubled, till we can send to Her mocrates
To bring his Forces hither: If the Traitors
Come not too suddenly upon us, We
Will turn the poisoned Darts they would throw at us
Against their own Bosoms, They do play with fire
Till it Consume 'em.

They like Moales have worked
In darkness all this while, to set the Kingdom
In such a flame that might both Perish you
And all your friends.

Fire sooner may dissolve
The Adamant, the Parched Negroes strike
Through the Battlements of Heaven. We are above
The reach of Malice, Fortune is Oblieg'd
To wait upon our Merit, and our Influence
Can in a breath dispierce their proud Designs,
As Winds divest the Trees of Leaves. Let fear
Dwell among Fools 't shall have no Harbor here.

Leave it to me, I Will do the business Gentlemen.

It Is not discretion to expose your Person
So unconcerned in this; it is we, the People,
Whose wrongs infer the Cause.

Which I must manage.
You Have made me your Protector, and Revenger,
Which I Will perform, did Gloomy Magic Guard him;
Or were he wrapped in Air, or hid in some
Dark Cavern of the Earth, my Heart grown big
Like Dire Revenging Thunder would make through
The bodies of them both to find him out.

Our lives shall wait on yours through dangers mouth.

An Archias, an Archias.

They have surpised the Guards, and are upon us.

Haste to the Winner, leave us to our Fortune,
Provide for thy own safety, We are armed
With Resolution to o'rcome the worst
The Fates can throw upon us; leave us, leaev us.

They Will hang me Sir, and I Have no
Mind at this time
To such a death.

Trifle not away
The time, they will not; go, leave us.

Well, If I chance to swing, pray
Heaven I may
Have Heart enough to bear it.

Injurious Fate, for all the pride thou take
In my destruction thus I will embrace thee.
Mischiefs like waves tumble o'r one another,
To beat themselves upon me, and they are welcome;
This passes me through all. Poor ignorant souls
That start at Death, and think him terrible!
His shape appears to me worthy the Courting;
And like my Friend I kiss him; on this Point
He shows himself most lovely, decked with all
The Ornaments of honor Fame can give him.
Thus I salute thee, thus again I greet thee,
And thus I offer up a heart unto thee:
A heart, thy Terror cannot tame, it is Love
Of thy sweet fellowship o'rcomes me, not
A fear to meet thee, that, my Soul disdaines.
Mazares dwell not on delays, be high
In thy Resolves, as thou have lived so die.
Oh, I have prevented you.

And I
Envy thy death in that I lose
The glory of saving of thy life.

Which must have lasted
But Pageant-like two days upon your Triumphs,
And my shame bin perpetual.

Do you find
Any remorse within you? does the wrongs
You Have offered to the Gods in pulling down
Their Temples and their Altars work upon you
Any show of repentance?

Thou Church-Glow-worm,
Who do pretend a heat of Zeal, yet art
Colder than th'Alpes in Charity, if proved,
My Enmity to thee gives strength unto me,
And I could -- but o I fail, this my death
Shall prove a Monument to my Glory -- Farewell.

Here is another of the crew.

Hang him up.

Who me Sir? I never dreamt of ill against you, have prayed as heartily for you
as for any Man living; for I may speak a proud word, I never prayed in my life.
I hope my mother brought me up better than so, to be hanged


Let me beseech your pardon for him, alas
He is not worth your Justice, and may prove
Useful hereafter -- to me

Noble Father,
For so we must be taught to call you, you
Have greater power upon us than this Grant;
It Is yours as soon as asked.

Heaven bless the King.

Take up Mazares body, his rites over,
The next thing we shall do, is to perform
Our Vows made to the Gods, and take Harmonia
Your Daughter to our Bed.

And the next thing
That follows is thy death, I must be King.

We Will have the Temples of the Gods repaired,
And their neglected Altars smoke with S^crifices.

A glorious Piece of Piety.

The Citizens
Who for their Duty to Evander were
Banished by the late Tyrant, straight called home;
And to Hermocrates with his Accomplices
Who did assist Mazares, a free Pardon.

A blessed beginning.

We will have the burden
The Kingdom now groans under by the Souldierly
Be taken off.

The Gods will dwell amongst us.

My Lords I shall endeavor to reduce
This rude and discomposed Soil into
A Tempe of Delight, where sweet Harmonia
Shall be the only Queen.

It will become me
To be but then your Servant.

Sweet thou know
I am beneath thy Courtship, and the interest
I have in thee is holy.

May you flourish
Together like the Plants the Sun gives life to.

Will your Highness
Think on Antanter?

Oh his Modesty
Works much upon us, we could chide our self
In that we have abused it, by neglect
Of his so just and reasonable a suit.
As for the other, his Competitor,
A black Cloud of Debauchness and lewd Vices
Ecclips his Valor, and gives us Occasion
To look upon Antanter as more worthy
Of such a Charge, whose Virtue is our Warrant.
Kings in bestowing Favors should be nice,
And rather punish than Encourage Vice.

Adulanter.

My Lord.

Wilt tell me one thing, and be just.

Rip up my heart my Lord, if I dissemble.

How stands thy affection to this King?

As clear as --

Mine is not, be free, I love thee,
And thou have found I do.

I have indeed,
I ow my life unto you, you may take it,
For that is the thing you aim at.

Thou Art deceived,
'Twill benefit me nothing; come, I know
Thou can not love him, thou have lost a Master
As far beyond him, as pure Substance is
Beyond Corruptible; and though he did
Me some ill offices, his Memory is
Still dear unto me.

Oh my Lord, my Lord.

By all the Gods I lie not, and to be
More plain with thee, I could wish Archias
Were ready for the Earth.

If that your Lordship
Be real, I would it were no worse.

If he were dead, my Daughter I would Govern,
And thou should govern me.

Oh fie, my Lord.

I do protest we would divide the Kingdom
Betwixt us, she (poor thing) would think it happiness
Enough for her to eat, sit, and be quiet:
Whereas the Mannaging of high affairs
Should pass through us, through us Adulanter.

Hum, hum.

Whose knee dares own a stiffeness? whose Obeisance
To Adulanter dare be wanting? when
Thou Frown'st, who dares but trembble?

When such a thing shall come to pass quoth a --

Do make a question on it, when now it lies
Within thy power to Compass.

How, in mine?

Art thou not my by means raised near his Person?
One of the Bedchamber? how easy it is
To cut is throat.

The sight of my own blood,
Has ever bin a Terror to me.

True,
That Is Natural, and yet no Courage wanting
To draw a Sea of blood from any other;
The Color is most precious for the sight,
And sweetly Cordial to the Man that tastes it.

Nay I confess I Would rather see of the two
Another blood than mine.

It Is justly spoken.
Would thou be King alone?

Hum -- I care not much.

Thou shall be so, be but thy self, and show
Thy Courage in this Enterprise: I Will Marry
Thee to my Daughter.

She Is a pretty thing,
By Heaven I shall be damned for her.

I Would rather
Thou should possess her than the Fool that has her;
And I, thy fellow servant once, will then
Become thy humblest servant, truly faithful.

You puff me up Sir, tell me how I shall
Contain my self.

Not within any limit
Less than a Kingdom.

How shall I obtain it?

Why, as you would kiss your hand, to kill the King;
It is but making the Guard Drunk, or so.

And I Am as good at that as any living;
My Lord I will be drunk too boot, for then
I have most Courage.

Backed with Night and silence
You cannot want it; when you have done the Deed
Strike toward the Back stairs, there I will wait you,
And Shelter you a while, 'till the bright Morn
Salutes your happiness.

My Lord, it is done;
I am as Mad as a March hare upon it,
Methinks I have him here, and there already,
You will hear more to morrow.

Silly Ass,
That only art imploid to carry me
Unto my bliss, thy self unto destruction;
He Is held an Animal has no Deceit
In these times to make his own Fortunes Great.

Heaven and good Angels guard you both.

Good rest
To you my Lord.

Lights for the Lord Archbishop.

Did the King call for me?

Not in our hearing.

Come, praised be Heaven there is no danger lurking, what need we wait? it is
better for the state of our bodies to fall down into the Wine seller, and there
bid defiance to the Devil and all is works


A Match, a match.

The Mask did keep the King up longer than
His usual time.

It was a handsome thing,
And well performed, all happiness wait on you.

Peace keep with your thoughts my Lord, Good night.

Lights there.

I have encountered with most of the Wines
In the Kings Seller to beget me Courage,
Yet I Am as Cold to it as a Cowcumer
I was not made for fighting, one loud snort
Destroys me and my Enterprise: It Is Dark
As is the Act I go about; were it light
I should not have the heart to kill a Pig.
I must turn on my left hand (when it is done)
To the back stairs, where there is a Trap-door
That will receive me. I do not like
These backward doings, pray Heaven I be not
Transported so with fear I do mistake
My right hand for my left, and so be trapt.
I cannot say in sober sadness -- but with your leave Sir;
He Is fast, yet dreams not on it, now! that one blow
May do it! I dare not stand the second --

Oh, oh, oh.

What disturbs thee sweet, speak to me,
Oh, her breasts are cold as snow-balls,
She grows stiff. Lights there -- where is our Guard?
No Attendants, not one Man --
Hear me, are you all --

The King's disturbed.

How fares your Highness?

Bring your lights this way -- Ah!
The Bed swims in a Sea of Blood -- Harmonia.

The Queen is Murdered.

The King Murdered! how!

Look here Cleander, here is a sight -- my Senses
Wander I know not whither.

How! my Daughter
Harmonia the Essence of my life.

Can no man find the Murderer, where is the Guard?

Dead drunk in the Wine-seller.

This is the Murderer, then seek no farther;
I will have justice, oh my cursed Fate.

How Is Grief transports him.

Can you blame him?
H'has lost a Daughter this Age cannot Parallel.

The Murderer not found yet?

This does appear like such a Monster.

His hire is paid, his Neck is broke.

It Is Adulanter, where found you him?

The Trap door near the back stairs we found open, which has not bin these ten
years before, and we suspecting searched the place and found him


And is he found? let him be Carbonadod,
To Breakfast his Confederate the Devil.
Or Pickle him in boiling Lead to get
The Fiend a stomach; Oh you Gods, you Devils,
Heaven, Hell, I will call all of you to question.

Let Us follow him with Circumspective care,
This is the first step to the Hill, Despair.

Thou shall no longer insult o'r my faculties
Unprofitable Grief; I Am not Designed
To end my days with thee, but must unload
My self of thy dull burden; were the whole
Stock of Woman lost in my Harmonia,
'T should not exact or draw a tear from me.
Shall I retreat now, that have Charged so fairly
At th'bosome of a King? no, on Cleander,
Perfect thy work, dis-seat him, make thy self
Lord of his fortunes, by thy Glorious Conquest.
My Resolution's fixed as is the Center,
Which Fate cannot remove; King thou must down,
Two heads cannot be impaled within one Crown.
But to my former shape; these are Courtspies,
I must not trust them. Good health to your Lordships,
You now do show the sweetness of your natures,
In time of heaviness, there is virtue in A Visit.

Would ours might bring you Comfort.

The King is so infected with his sorrow,
Advice is lost to cure him. All his Studdy
Is to preserve the Memory of your Daughter,
Which 'cause he will not lose, he makes her shadow
His Idol, to the which he offers up
His Morn and Night Oblations.

How should I
Behave my self then? my Grief should as far
Exceed his, as my loss transcended his.

Your loss was great.

Great do you tell me! Great!

I cannot think the ill was meant to her,
Rather unto the King.

The Guard
Upon Examination said that Adulanter
Was drunk when he left them, but what --

Pray tell me no more on it, it is not pleasing, I may be quiet
In my own house I hope.

We came not Sir
With an intent to raise your Anger, but
'To allay your sorrow with our best advice.

You may go home and advise upon it; tell me of comfort, and advice?

Nay good my Lord you may take pet and hang your self if you please, it is all
one to u


Teach me to tame a Tiger when his fierceness
Ranges for Prey, and forbids Opposition;
Empty the Ocean and fill it again;
To breath life into Clay -- Tell me of Comfort?

Come let us leave him, alas it is his Torment
To hear her named -- We take our leaves my Lord.

Why farewell you -- so, they are gone,
I had no better way than to Rave them hence.
Oh, are you come Sir, why so long first?

Goud faith, gif I had rid the Deel and spult the weamb oath wund, I cud a mead
na mare heast. Kym away Sir, what is your Wull an pleas your Honor


They say you have great skill.

Very Muckle Sir; I ha not ben a Poles-Screamer this twenty years far naught.

I do not love the King.

Reight weel Sir, nor I by my saw what wud you toll him Sir?

I would be rid of him.

Woll your Honor be a Hearse or a Meare?

Away, I Would be quit of him.

Aw Sir, your honor wud be quite au him! be me saw, ye fall, but whilke way me
Loord an plase yoor honor


I Would have him poisoned.

Peyson'd! be me saw I kan dew that brawly, I leard it fra Bough-wha-nan Sir.

And he was an excellent King-killer.
He has a Picture of my murdered Daughter,
On which he paies his early and late kisses,
Not for the Love he bears her Memory,
But to deceive Revenge.

Aw Sir! she fall buss him deed a me saw, -- woll
Ye shaw me toll her Sir.

I Am glad to see the spirit of a Scot
So resolute, it stars not at the Murdering
Of the Fools Idol, King.

Aw King Mon! dee'l aw me saw bet I, au me Countramen ha peyson'd thra better
Kingdoms as this, au gif I sud noow for aw King the Deel au me faw lugg's


Thou art a brave fellow, and it is pity such
Desert should suffer; come along with me.
When thou have done, I Will make an end of thee.

I thought it then high time to overtake
His Mounting-pride, and Level 't with the Earth;
And not to let him grow more fruitful in
His sin, and overtopping Insolency.

It was a Deed Antanter that deserves
To live in the Mouth of Fame, that after Ages
From thence may learn not to fear bugbear-greatness.

Thimistius body I gave burial, and Left tothers to Miselluses disposal.


'Twas no small sport to him, but it was strange
Planetius should deny Assistance to him.

I do believe Missellus and he held
A Correspondency, but for what end I cannot reach.

He is not to be trusted;
If this distemper once would leave the King
Thou would not think it a Miracle to see
Me in Planetius Seat. Now Epecides
How fares the King?

Oh Gentlemen, our hopes
That promised a Growing-happiness
From his indulgent Beams, One Minute has
Destroi'd for ever.

How do you mean my Lord?

The King is poisoned.

How Poisoned! Poisoned?

There is a secret Devil lurks among us,
Who holds Intelligence with Hell to blast
Our Kingdoms Peace and Comfort; see, they come.

The Flames of Aetna are not fierce to mine,
Each faculty conspires my Torment; oh
I burn, I burn.

Great Sir, be not an Enemy
Unto your Being, take this as --

Away,
You may as well give Physic to the dead,
As to his Heart whose agony exceeds
The sense of Ease; I am resolved to take
No more of your vain helps; leave me I pray.

My most Gracious Souveraign,
I have a heart too weak to bear the burden
Of so much Woe, your sufferings bear me down
Beneath the hope of Comfort.

Spare thy Grief;
Harmonia treads the Milkie way, and I
Must through this fire, be purified to meet
Her and the Joys she brings me.

Does none hear
By whom, or how these Miseries should come?

Trouble not your self (my Lord)
I freely Pardon
And will reward the Doer, so declare it*
For he has taken pains to send me to
The Place I so much longed for; I do charge you
(If my last words may win Obedience from you)
Straight to Proclaim this; fain I would salute
Him ever I die, that was so kind unto me.

Unheard of Charity.

My Lord from ou
I have conceived in Specie the joys
I must receive hereafter; those sweet Odours
Perfume my Spiritual sense, and strengththen that,
Although my Temporal decay and perish.

Here is a Scotch Apothecary that confesses --

Art thou the Villain?

Au the mickle Deul -- god gin the King wud gi me bet even hauf ooer toll live
bet I cud speak -- aw -- Deeth thau limmer loone -- aw, aw --


My Lord 'twas rashly done, we might have found
Where the ill vapor rests begets these mischiefs,
And who set him on work.

The Devil, who else?
And he has paid him's wages.

Cleander.

The King calls Sir*

I feel my vitals fail me, Oh Cleander
I shall see my Harmony, thy blessed Daughter,
Ever forty Minutes pass, I must bequeath thee
A Legacy of Care, this drooping Kingdom.
My Lords I hope the love you ever bore me
(Though Heaven denies me time to Merit it)
Will now express it self in the approving
Him I present to you, a dying Man
Who has no ends upon you, nor the Kingdom,
Farther than your perpetual flourishing.

I beseech your Grace, -- alas --

You hear me Lords.

We do Sir, and accept the choice
You Have made,
With more than willingness.

You have not spoke for me.

Nor me.

I am at rest, farewell.

He Is dead.

And I
His weeping Monument remains till Fate
Translates my better part to a better State.

These are fine turning times, I wonder when
'Twill come to my turn to be King, I have
A Heart as fit, and large, and dare as far
Adventure for it as any, But the Fates
Of Soldiers serve to Promote others ends,
Which done, they do forget we ever were friends.

Your words sound like the Oracle's, as full
Of truth, and plainer to the Intellect.

How sweet and freely Rome enjoyed her self,
'Till she submitted to the Power and pride
Of one man's Rule? Tell me what good did ever
Kings bring unto our Country, that we might not
Have purchased without them? Ills they have
Almost incredible; Our Coffers emptied,
To fill their Treasury, and maintain their Riot.

And wedded to perpetual Slavery.
For when one Tyrant falls another Rises
From his Corrupted Loins, that proves far worse
Perhaps than did the former, So that we
Must never hope for better, but be Armed
With Patience to endure the worst.

Suppose
We would allow of Kingly Power, where is
The Man descended from that Race? Cleander
He was but one of us the other day;
And sure we are not of so tame a brood,
But to think We deserv't as well as he.
Why should not you Icetis, or Hipparinus
Rule, or thou, Epecides, or my self?
We Are of as good a Mould, and have as much
T'elate us, as his Worship.

Very right.
And have as great an Interest in the People
And Commonwealth; this of Necessity
Must breed Con^usion amongst us, this Example
Kindles in every Man desire of Rule,
Which to Archieve, how perilous so ever
The Attempt may prove, they will leave no means unsought,
Till their irregular Sense, spurning at Order,
Turns all into a Chaos.

Who can tell
But this Intruder was the efficient Cause
Of his own Daughters ruin, and the Kings.

It was a notable piece of Policy
To kill the Apothecary and prevent Confession.

What Is your advice?

To join with us,
And take the Peoples Yoke off from the Tyranny
Of Kings hereafter.

And to have our Country
Governed by three or ten, as did the Romans.

Who shall continue but a Year in Power,
And then successive Pat^iots be chosen,
Who shall have Power to punish in their time
The Crimes their Predecessors did commit
During their time of Rule.

So shall the People
Not be to seek for Justice, but find ease
Unto their grievances, and the vile Minds
Of Avaritious and Ambitious Men
Be either punished, or else Rebated.

It cannot but content the People highly,
It Is Coppied from so fair a President.

And with you, and for you, and them, we will spend
Our lives and fortunes.

We will do the like
With you, and for you, and thus linked together,
We dare Contemn Cleander's Power.

And blow
His Glorious hopes into the Air.

Be sudden,
And we may take the Serpent in his Cell;
But our delays may give the Monster time
Of coming forth, and strength to overcome us.

We will possess the People with the Glory
Of their long hidden liberties, with promise
Or Restoration, if it lies within
The power of friends, Money, or life to Compass.

He that is besotted to his fear, or Ease,
Will make his Patience prove his worst disease.

Return m^ Obedience to the King Evander.
And this unto Missellus, tell him I
With all the force that Mona can afford me
Will wait upon his H^ghness and himself At Erix.

I shall my Lord.

How am I
Bound to the Gods for their superlative goodness,
That here an offering of Mercy meets me
By their Dictation; I whose Treachery
Unto my King Merits severest Justice,
Am punished with a Revengless Pardon,
Which is indeed my Torment, that I should
Ever have bin so wicked against a Prince
Deserves so much good from me, but my Soul
Henceforth shall cleave fast to this Principle,
"The longer growth Diseases do endure,
"The more the Grief, more famous is the Cure.

Traitors, hands off, it is Sacrilege to use
The Person of your King with such Irreverence.

Our King -- ha ha ha.

We Will make you sing another Song.

Have I deserved so ill, that none will give
A Death more honorable to me?

Thou have lived
Base, and must basely die.

Forgive me Heaven,
And you bright Stars whose Luster I Eclipse
Here, to shine brighter there, Plead not against me,
But be as Merciful as you are Innocent.

Were thou the death of Archias and thy Daughter?

Ambition was, to which I gave consent.

And now you see the Pinnacle from which
You must be tumbled down, away with him.

Yet hear me.

Confession's ti'd to Destiny, you shall with us.

You see the desperate effects that wait
On this thing called Monarchy, because
It carries a continuance, and all
Men Naturally have an Ambition to
Make great their line, and families by succession;
When ours does blunt the Edge of such Resolves;
And no Man, were it not for the Common good,
Would entertain the Office, being rather
A Place of care than Profit, in the which
Men must so square their Actions, they may be
Able to stand the Peoples questioning,
When as their time of Government's expired.

It is not so with Monarchy, Kings may
Commit what Outrages they please upon
The People, and none dare so much as think
They have done ill.

If you please to walk that way
You may see Cleander swinging for his life.

Oh by all means let us go.

It may be he may confess something more.

My Peoples troubles do afflict me more
Than all the wrongs and injuries they have done me:

The Gods had lost their Attribute of Just,
Had they not punished them with these Convulsions,
Whose fits direct their Sense unto the ruin
They Have brought upon themselves now at their doors.

Good Heaven divert it, I shall be more Chary
In spilling of their blood than of my own;
And I shall think it greater honor to me
(In purchasing my own) to have my Temples
Surrounded with a peaceful Garland than
Obtain it by the Victory and Slaughter
Of my poor Subjects.

It Is your mercy Sir,
With which you overflow -- here is Planetius.

I offer at your Highness feet a life
That has long since bin forfeited.

The which
I give thee back; live to deserve my favor.

I would I could recover so much time,
As I have lost, to ad unto the days
I Am yet to spend, to serve you, this your Mercy
Does come so near the temper of the Gods,
Fame cannot but record it.

Has our Subjects
The knowledge that we live?

I did dispierce it
Through all the parts of Mona:

And how took they it?

Miraculously; but so, I might discover
Their Joy was unexpressible.

We Will have
Our Pardon (as we March) Proclaimed to all
Will come in to us; Clemency not force
Befits a King, Rigor makes People worse.

Heaven bless the King* March Gentlemen.

It Is brave to be a King, his spirit's low
And base as Earth, that knows not how to use
The Power the Fates have put into his hands*
And will accept of less; damn 'annuall Rule,
Shall I who dare do more than kill a thousand,
Be Subject to the questioning of ten?
The People have put me in power, and I
Will make my best advantage on it; it is
But Justice to break faith with faithless Men.
Give me the Nod that strikes a trembling in
The stiffe-neck'd People, and does make 'em keep
A distance and a duty; there is no Glory
Like being Singular, hence idle honesty
That sleep'st thy time away, and art adored
By none but empty Sculls and tattered Jerkins;
There Is no such thing as virtue in thy Rags.
That, we prize to be virtuous and good
Merits its Estimation. Welcome Greatness,
Virtue resides with thee. My hopes by this
Are by Antanter perfected, he is here;
Now my best Genius tell me how much
I stand indebted to thee, is it done?

Done to a hair Sir, We surpised 'm suddenly,
Trussed up the Magistrates to whom y'ad promised
Such glorious freedom, who did curse and swear
At Death and Destiny. The Forts and Castles
Are all our own, and now we safely may,
Cry with one voice, long live Agathocles.

How shall I make requital for this Project
Which thou have more than formed, performed so bravely?
I will Create thee Archduke of Palermo,
And when I die, will leave the Kingdom to thee.

But give me leave I pray Sir --
In whose Power
Lies it to make me Duke?

In mine, whose else?
Am I not thy King.

Pray who made you so?

The Gods.

Pray which of them? Have I bin Idle.

No, Dear Antanter no; It was thy hand
Directed by the Gods that made me King.

Then 'twas my hand directed by the Gods
That made you King.

Right, right Antanter.

And now my hand directed by the Gods,
Will you un^King? -- take him unto your Charge.

How?

Very right Sir, Charity begins
At home, and I Am not such an Ass to stand
To your reward, when I can pay my self.

What do thou mean?

To be what you would be,
That is, a King,

A King? of what?

Of better men than thou art -- it is a wrong
Unto our Honor to hold Parley with thee.
Off with his Head; It is a Death more Noble
Than you bestowed upon Cleander Sir,
Or Ordered for Icetis, or the Magistrate.

But do you hear Sir King.

Obey our Will --
And Sir, say you are well dealt with*

Hell take you
And your dealing too; Heaven is thus just
With such as fall from Virtue to their Lust.

So, he is gone, fallen in the Trap he laid
For th'Magistrates, whom I have but secured,
Till they allow my Power, or dye by it.
The Title King's indifferent to me,
Give me the essential part, and let the shadow
Vanish, and be forgot. What had this Lord
More in him of a man, to draw Obedience
Than I, except his Title? and that had not
Virtue enough to save him from my wrath.
It is not birth, or blood, but thou dear Instrument,
That can defend, offend, raise or dis-seate
High Potentates, and make a Beggar great.
Be thou auspicious Armed Mars to me,
And I Will adore no other Gods but thee.

The General hearing of these distractions,
Has dr^wn his Army this way, and puts in
For title to the Kingdom.

Though he was
My General once, I Will scourge him into duty,
And make him know his distance, we will meet him.
Leave what force you can possibly allow
Here, to secure the People and the Garrisons
Now in our Custody, lest they Revolt,
Or become Mutineers, Hermocrates
Shall find as tuffe a business on it, as ever
The Wars afforded him; Give double pay
To such as will come in to us, and leave
His Party, since, that I am in, I Will through,
Though the Kingdoms treasury bleed for it, and lean famine
Feed on the People, 'till there scarce are left
The Image of a Man alive; 'twere base
Now to Retreat; fear gives a Coward place.

Is It possible Antanter dares do this.

Agathocles is beheaded, Hipparinus
With the rest of the Magistrates of Palermo and
The Governor Icetis are secured.
The Forts and Castles all are in his Power,
And has surpised the Treasury.

A brave fellow:
How long thinks he to keep this? I do wonder
Missellus or Planetius stir not 'bout it:
But they indeed are such known enemies
To one another, neither of them dare
Peep forth, lest the other be upon his back.

I know your Excellency will be the Man
Must make the Soldier flourish and be happy.

I and Atanter are the only Men
I see must go to Cudgels for it.

Alas,
Our force will scatter his, as Northern winds
Disperse the leaves in Autumn.

But he has
The advantage by the Treasury, and Money
Will purchase Men, and friendship.

Victory
Will draw them all to us, I hope there is not
A Man amongst us so in love with his life,
But he will sacrifice it for your Excellence;
What say you Gentlemen?

Our lives are his.

I thank you fellow Soldiers;
Armed with you,
I dare Oppose the Destinies. He down,
The Guerdon of our Conquest is a Crown.

How poor and bare's this Province made? we scarce
Can get Provision for our Men and H^rse.

But we are near the City of Monreall,
An that was wont to abound with all Provision.

Have you informed the Archbishop and the Magistrates
That we are drawing toward them,

We have
By by your Express, and wonder that we hear
No sooner from them.

Disobedient Guilt
Throws me thus low for Mercy.

Here, rise up

Distracted shame so overcomes me Sir,
I cannot look your Highness in the face.

Return unto your Virtue, and we shall
Be happy in your friendship. Epecides
How do thou relish us?

As I would Sir,
The Author of my Being, Peace, and happiness.
My Soul has wandered all this while, and now,
With you, it is returned to its first Station.

But what has brought thee to Monreall? tell me.

After Cleander's death, my friend Agathocles,
Whose breast I thought had bin so Manned with Virtue
Ambition could not batter it, compli'd
With the Soldiery, of which Antanter was
The Chief, to put the Magistrates to death.
No sooner that Antanter had secured
The Forts and Castles, and made all his own,
But he begins to fall off from his Bargain
With the new King, and to himself does give
A Law to take his head off, and indeed
No Man could promise to himself a safety,
Unless he did submit unto his Power,
To which I knew I could not bend my Heart,
And therefore for self-Preservation made
Bold with my Lord Archbishop.

What is that
Antanter, whose Audaciousness is so
Destructive to our Peace?

He was an Officer
Under Hermocrates Mazares General.

And now they both are tugging to undo
The Kingdom, and from eithers Ruin to
Raise to the Victor Glory.

Ah poor Cicily,
How have thou been beaten and banded to
Promote the ends of turbulent Spirited Men?
My Lords while they are striving for the Mastery,
What if we fell upon them?

Very requisite.

Let us be private in it and do it suddenly,
But first we will have a Baiting at your house.

You Highness will enrich me with the favor.

Have I singl'd thee?

Sir know you are Saucy,
We use to keep at distance with such fellows.

It Is likely; to come near us may prove dangerous.

Fellow thou have greater honor done thee now
Than e'^ the Wars bestowed on thee, thou grappl'st
With no less than a King.

Of Kitchin-stuffe.

I Will make thee do thy duty.

That Is to beat you.
What will you take Sir for your Kingdom, now?

Your Head and Quarters Sir to fix on the Gates.

And this next touch to boot.

'sDeath, I think
've fooled away my Courage;
How do you now Sir?

As well as ever I did Sir -- have I reached you?

Your Arm's to short, and your
Aim worse;
By Heaven,
Had thou Indented with the Fates to live
But for a Minute longer, thus I Would cancel it

And thus I meet thy Resolution.

Give Order for the Magistrates
Enlargement.

Ah, how my Fate afflicts me with fresh Torments?
Evander living?

Whose Injuries lie heavy
Upon our Souls; most gracious Sir how ever
Our lives have been disturbance to your Kingdom,
In Death with you and it we sue for Peace;
Forgiveness Royal Sir.

We come not to
Possess our own with thoughts to be Revenged*
Or if we did, you have escaped it, Heaven*
Forgive you as we do.

May never Foreign
Or homebred Jars wither your Peaceful Laurel.

And thus our Enmity does end; thy hand.

Thy cheek -- farewell.

Plenty and Peace perpetually dwell among you --

Two as brave Spirits
As ever Cicily bred.

The Magistrates are here Sir.

Hipp. At your feet, Royal Sir we fall.

Rise in our favor.

Your Mercy has no President.

Heaven make you stronger in your faith and duties.
Hereafter to us, what is past We Pardon.

All the lowering Aspects of Malignant Stars,
That lately threatened ruin to this Kingdom,
Are at your Glorious Presence sunk beneath*
Their primitive Conceptions.

Take up those bodies.
My Lords, with your assistance we must do
A cure upon the Kingdom, in the seating
Its dislocated joints; we shall not take
Notice hereafter who amongst you have
Had hands in her impairing, out receive you
With no less favor than the rest, not doubting
But that the smart you have felt by these Changes,
Will draw you home to Constancy, and the Wool
That has so violently been taken from
Your Sheep, for want of an Indulgent Shepherd,
Make you prize one the better.

May Heaven transform our shapes when our hearts change

Then are we strong enough to Combat Fate,
And Cure the wounds thus made upon the State.


