Give ear, the worthy, hear what Time proclaims.


What? what? Is It worth our ears?


Or eyes?

Or noses?

For we are curious, Fame: indeed, the Curious.

We come to spy.


And hearken.


And smell out.


More then you understand, my hot Inquisitors.
Is it not so?

We cannot tell.


It may be.


Howeuer, go you on, let us alone.


We may spy out, that, which you never meant.


And nose the thing you sent not. First, whence come you?


I come from Saturn.


Saturn, what is he?


Some Protestant I warrant you, a Time-seruer,
As Fame her self is.

You are near the right.
Indeed, he' is Time it self, and his name KRONOS.

How! Saturn! Chronos, and the Time it self.
You' are found: enough. A notable old Pagan.

One of their Gods, and eats up his own children.


A Fencer, and does travail with a since
in stead of a long-sword.

Has bin often called from it,
to be their Lord of misrule.

As Cincinnatus
Was, from the plough, to be Dictator.

Yes.
We need no interpreter, on, what of Time?

The Time has sent me with my trumpe to summon
All sorts of persons worthy, to the view
Of some great spectacle he means, to night,
To' exhibit, and with all solemnity.

O, we shall have his Saturnalia.


His days of feast, and liberty again.


Where men might do, and talk all that they list.


Slaves of their lords.


The servants of their masters.


And subjects of their Soucraigne.


Not so lavish.


It was a brave time that.


This will be better.
I spy it coming, peace, all the impostures,
The prodigies, diseases, and distempers,
The knaueries of the Time, we shall see all now.

And hear the passages, and several humors
Of men, as they are swayd by their affections:
Some grumbling, and some mutining, some scoffing,
Some pleased, some pyning, at all these we laughing.

I have it here, here, strong, the sweat of it,
And the confusion (which I love) I nose it,
It tickles me.

My four eyes itch for it.


And my ears tingle, would it would come forth:
This room will not receive it.

That Is the fear.


What? what? my friends, will not this room receive?


That which the Time is presently to show us.


The Time? Lo I the man, that hate the time
That is, that love it not; and (though in ryme,
I here do speak it) with this whipp you see,
Do lash the Time, and am my self lash-free.

Who Is this?


It Is Chronomastix, the brave Satyr,


The gentleman-like Satyr, cares for nobody,
His forehead tip't with bays, do you not know him?

Yes Fame must know him, all the Town admires him.


If you would see Time quake and shake, but name us,
It is for that, we'are both beloved, and famous.

We know, Sir: but the Time's now come about.


And promises all liberty.


Nay license.


We shall do what we list.


Talk what we list.


And censure whom we list, and how we list.


Then I will look on Time, and love the same,
And drop my whip: who is this! my Mistress! Fame!
The Lady whom I honor, and adore!
What luck had I not to see her before!
Pardon me, Madam, more then most accursed,
That did not spy your Ladyship at first,
To' have given the stoop, and to salute the skirts
Of her, to whom all Ladies else are flirts!
It is for you, I revel so in rhyme,
Dear Mistress, not for hope I have the Time
Will grow the better by it. To serve Fame
Is all my end, and get my self a name.

Away I know thee not, wretched Impostor,
Creature of glory, Mountebanke of wit,
Selfe-louing Braggart, Fame does sound no trumpett
To such vain, empty fools: It Is infamy
Thou seru'st, and follow'st, scorn of all the Muses,
Go revel with thine ignorant admirers,
Let worthy names alone.

O, you the Curious,
Breath you to see a passage so injurious,
Done with despite, and carried with such tumor
Against me, that am so much the friend of rumor?
(I would say Fame?) whose Muse has rid in rapture
On a soft ambling verse to every capture,
From the strong guard, to the weak child that reads me,
And wonder both of him that loves, or dread's me!
Who with the lash of my immortal pen
Have scourged all sorts of vices, and of men!
Am I rewarded, thus? have I, I say,
From Enuies self torn praise, and bays away,
With which my glorious front, and word at large,
Triumphs in print at my admirers charge.

Rare! how he talks in verse, just as he writes!


When have I walked the streets, but happy he
That had the finger first to point at me,
Prentice, or Iourneyman! The shop does know it!
The vnletter'd Clarke! mayor and minor Poet!
The Sempster has sat still as I passed by,
And dropped her needle! Fishwiues staid their cry!
The Boy with buttons, and the Basket wench
To vent their wares, into my works do trench!
A pudding-wife, that would despise the Times,
Has vtterd' frequent pen' worths, through my rimes,
And, with them, diu'd into the Chambermaid,
And she unto her Lady has convayd
The seasond morsels, who has sent me pensions,
To cherish and to heighten my inventions.
Well, Fame shall know it yet, I have my faction,
And friends about me, though it please detraction
To do me this affront. Come forth that love me,
And now, or never, spite of Fame, approve me.

How now! what is here? Is hell broke loose?


You Will see.
That he has favorers, Fame, and great ones too,
That unctuous Bounty, is the Boffe of Belinsgate,

Who feasts his Muse with claret wine, and oysters,


Grows big with Satyr,


Goes as long as an Elephant:


She labors, and lies in of his inventions,


Has a male poem in her belly now,
Big as a colt,

That kicks at Time already,


And is no sooner foald, but will neigh sulphur:


The next?


A quondam Justice, that of late
Has bin discarded out 'o the pack of the peace,
For some lewd leuitie he holds in capite,
But constantly loves him. In days of yore,
He used to give the charge out of his poems,
He carries him about him, in his pocket,
As Philip's Son did Homer, in a casket,
And cries, O happy Man, to the wrong party,
Meaning the Poet, where he meant the subject:

What are this pair?


The ragged rascals?


Yes.


Mere rogues, you' world thinke'em rogues, but they are friends,
One is his Printer in disguise, and keeps
His press in a hollow tree, where to conceal him,
He works by glow-worme light, the Moone's too open.
The other zealous Ragg is the Compositor,
Who in an angle, where the ants inhabit,
(The Emblem's of his Labors) will sit curled
Whole days, and nights, and work his eyes out for him.

Strange arguments of love! There is a School master
Is turning all his works too, into Latin,
To pure Satyricke Latin; makes his Boys
To learn him; calls him the times Iuuenal;
Hangs all his School with his sharp sentences;
And over the Execution place has painted
Time whipped, for terror to the Infantery.

This Man ofwarre in the rere, He is both Trumpet
And Champion to his Muse.

For the whole City.


Has him by roat, recites him at the tables,
Where he does govern, swears him into name,
Upon his word, and sword, for the sole youth
Dares make profession of Poetic truth,
Now militant amongst us. To th'incredulous,
That dagger is an article he uses,
To riuet his respect into their pates,
And make the^ faithful, Fame, you will find you' have wro^gd him.

What a confederacy of Folly is here.


Now Fame, how like you this?


This false upon you
For your neglect.

He scorns you, and defies you,
H'as got a Fame on's own, as well as a Faction.

And this will deifie him, to despite you.


I envy not the (...).
'Twill prove but deifying of a pompion.

Well, what is that the Time will now exhibit?


What gambols? what devises? what new sports?


You promised us, we should have any thing.


That Time would give us all we could imagine.


You might imagine so, I never promised it.


Pox, then it is nothing. I had now a fancy
We might have talked of the King.

Or State.


Or all the World.


Censured the Counsel, e're they censure us.


We do it in Paul's.


Yes, and in all the tauernes.


A comely license. They that censure those
They ought to reverence, meet they that old curse,
To beg their bread, and feel eternal winter.
There Is difference 'twixt liberty, and license.

Why if it be not that, let it be this then
(For since you grant us freedom, we will hold it,)
Let Us have the giddy world turned the heels upward,
And sing a rare black Sanctus, on his head,
Of all things out of order.

No, the Man
IN the moon dance a Corranto, his bush
At's back, a fire; and his dog piping Lachrimae.

Or let us have all the people in an uproar,
None knowing, why, or to what end: and in
The midst of all, start up an old mad woman
Preaching of patience.

No, no, I Would have this-


What?


Any thing.


That could be monstrous:
Enough, I mean. A Babel of wild humors.

I, all disputing of all things they know not,


And talking of all men they never heard of,


And all together by the ears of the sudden,


And, when the matter is at hottest, then
All fall a sleep.

Agree among your selves,
And what it is youl'd have, I Will answer you.

O, that we shall never do.


No, never agree.


Not upon what. Something that is unlawful.


I, or unreasonable.


Or impossible.


Let 't be uncivil enough, you hit us right.


And a great noise.


To little, or no purpose.


And if there be some mischief, 'twill become it.


But see, there be no cause, as you will answer it.


These are mere Monsters.


I, all the better.


You do abuse the Time, these are fit freedoms
For lawless prentices, on a Shrouetuesday,
When they compel the Time to serve their riot:
For drunken Wakes, and strutting Beare-baytings,
That savor only of their own abuses.

Why, if not those, then something to make sport.


We only hunt for nouelty, not truth.


I Will fit you, though the Time faintly permit it.


Why now they are kindly used, like such Spectators,
That know not what they would have. Commonly,
The Curious are ill natured, and like flies,
Seek Times corrupted part to blow upon:
But may the sound ones live with fame, and honor,
Free from the molestation of these Insects,
Who being fled, Fame now pursues her errand.

For you, great King, to whom the Time does owe
All his respects, and reverence, behold
How Saturn, urged at request of Love,
Prepares the object to the place to night.
Within yon'd darkness, Venus bath found out
That Hecate (as she is Queen of shades)
Keeps certain glories of the Time obscured,
There, for her self alone to gaze upon,
As she did once the fair Endimion.
These, Time has promised at Loves suit to free,
As being fitter to adorn the age,
By you restored on earth, most like his own:
And fill this world of beauty here, your Court.
To which his bounty, see, how men prepare
To fit their votes below, and thronging come
With longing passion to enjoy the effect!
Hark, it is Love begins to Time. Expect.

Beside, that it is done for Love,
It is a work, great Time, will prove
Thy honor, as men's hopes above.

If Love be pleased, so am I:
For Time could never yet deny
What Love did ask, if Love knew why.

She knew, and has expressed it now,
And so does every public vow
That heard her why, and waits thy how.

You shall not long expect; with ease
The things come forth, are borne to please:
Look, have you seen such lights as these?

These, These must sure some wonders be!


O, what a glory it is to see
Men's wishes, Time, and Love agree!

What grief, or envy had it been,
That these, and such had not bin seen,
but still obscured in shade!
Who are the glories of the Time,
Of youth, and feature too, the prime,
And for the light were made?

1 Their very number, how it takes!
2 What harmony their presence makes!
3 How they inflame the place!

Now they are nearer seen, and viewed;
For whom could Love have better sued?
or Time have done the grace?

The night could not these glories miss,
Good Time, I hope, is taken with this.

If Time were not, IN am sure Love is.
Between us it shall be no strife:
For now it is Love, gives Time his life.

Let Time then so with Love conspire,
as strait be sent into the court
A little Cupid, armed with fire,
Attended by a iocund Sport,
To breed delight, and a desire
of being delighted in the nobler sort.

The wish is crowned, as soon as made.


And CUPID conquers, e're he does invade.
His Victories of lightest trouble prove.
For there is never labor, where is Love.

Take breath a while, young Bloods, to bring
Your forces up, whilst we go sing
Fresh charges, to the Beauties here.

Or, if they charge you, do not fear,
Though they be better armed then you:
It is but standing the first view,
And then they yield.

Or quit the field.


Nay, that they will never do,
They Will rather fall upon the place
Then suffer such disgrace.
You are but Men at best, they say,
And they from those never ran away.

You, Sir, that are the Lord of Time,
Receive it not as any crime
Against Majesty, that Love and Sport
To night have entered in your Court.

Sir, doubt him more of some surprise
Upon your self. He has his eyes.
You are the noblest object here,
And it is for you alone I fear:
For here are Ladies, that would give
A brave reward, to make Love live
Well, all his life, for such a draught.
And therefore, look to every shaft,
The Wag's a Deacon in his Craft.

My Lords, the Honors of the Crown,
Put off your sowrenesse, do not frown,
Bid cares depart, and business hence:
A little, for the Time dispense.

Trust nothing that the Boy lets fall,
My Lords, he has plots upon you all.
A pensioner unto your wives,
To keep you in vxorious gives,
And so your sense to fascinate,
To make you quit all thought of state,
His amorous questious to debate.
But, hear his Logic, he will prove
There is no business, but to be in love.

The words of Sport, my Lords, and course.
Your Ladies yet, will not think worse
Of love for this,, They shall command
My Bow, my Quiver, and my Hand.

What, here to stand
and kill the Flies?
Alas, thy service they despise.
One Beauty here, has in her eyes,
More shafts then from thy bow ere flew,
Or that poor quiver knew.
These Dames
They need not Love's, they 'haue Natures flames.

I see that Beauty, that you so report.


Cupid, you must not point in Court,
Where live so many of a sort.
Of Harmony these learned their speech,
The Graces did them footing teach,
And, at the old Idalian bralls,
They daunc'd your Mother down, she calls.

Arm, arm then all.


Young Bloods come on,
And charge: Let every Man take one.

And try his fate.


These are fair wars,
And will be carried without scarres.

A joining, but of feet, and hands,
Is all the Time, and Love commands.

Or if you do their gloves off strip,
Or taste the nectar of the lip:
See, so you temper your desires,
For kisses, that ye suck not fires.

The Courtly strife is done, it should appear,
Between the Youths, and Beauties of the year,
We hope that now these lights will know their sphere,
And strive hereafter to shine ever here:
Like brightest Planets, still to move
In the eye of Time, and orbs of Love.

Hippolitus, Hippolitus.


Diana?


She.
Be ready you, or CEPHALVS,
To wait on me.

We ever be.


Your Goddess has bin wronged to night,
By Loves report unto the Time.

The injury it self will right
Which only Fame has made a crime.
For Time is wise,
And has his ears as perfect as his eyes.

Who Is that descends? Diana?


Yes.


By like her troop she has begun to miss.


Let Us meet, and question what her errand is.


She will prevent thee, Saturn, not to excuse
Her-selfe unto thee, rather to complain
That thou and Venus both should so abuse
The name of Dian, as to entertayne
A thought, that she had purpose to defraud
The Time, of any glories that were his:
To do Time honor rather, and applaud
His worth, has bin her study,

And it is.
I called these youth's forth, in their blood, and prime,
Out of the honor, that I bore their parts;
To make them fitter so to serve the Time
By labor, riding, and those ancient arts,
That first enabled men unto the wars,
And furnished Heaven with so many Stars:

As Perseus, Castor, Pollux, and the rest,
Who were of Hunters first, of Men the best,
Whose shades do yet remain within yond' groves,
Themselves there sporting with their nobler loves:

And so may these do, if the Time give lean.


Chaste Dians purpose we do now conceive,
And yield thereto.

And so does Love.


All votes do in one circle move.


Turn Hunters then,
again.
Hunting, it is the noblest exercise,
Makes men laborious, active, wise,
Brings health, and does the spirits delight,
It help's the hearing, and the sight:
It teaches Arts that never slip
The memory, good Horsmanship,
Search, sharpnes, courage, and defense,
And chaseth all ill habits thence.
Turn Hunters then,
again,
But not of Men.
Follow his ample,
And just example,
That hates all chase of malice, and of blood:
And studies only ways of good,
To keep soft peace in breath.
Man should not hunt Mankind to death,
But strike the enemies of Man;
Kill vices if you can:
They are your wildest beasts,
And when they thickest fall, you make the Gods true feasts:


