THE Self-Tormenter. A COMEDY, Acted at the Feast of Cybele, WHEN L. Valerius
Flaccus, and L. Cornelius-Lentulus were Curule Edil's, By the Company of
Ambivius Turpio

It was taken from the GREEK of Menander;

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was perform*d the
first time of Acting on unequal FLUTES; The second time on two Right-handed
FLUTES

This PLAY was Acted a Third time,

Under the Consulship of Titus Sempronius, and M. Juventius.

A. U. C. 591. Ante Christ 159.

SCENE, The Fields near ATHENS.

The TIME about Ten or Eleven Hours.

The Country before Door. The Shut of the Evening. THo our Acquaintance is but
very short, for it began, ye know, upon your buying this Farm here next mine;
that and little else being the occasion of it, yet, either your own worth or
your Neighborhood, which I esteem next door to Friendship, makes me take the
boldness with all freedom to tell ye, that you do not seem to live as becomes
either your Age, or your Condition. For in the Name of Heaven and Wonder! what
do ye do with your self? what would ye be at? If a body may Judge by your Face,
you write Threescore at least. I don't know any that is better seated; has a
prettier Estate; or is better served than you: and yet you manage all the
Business your self, as if you had not a Soul in the World to help ye. Let me go
out never so early in the Morning, or come home never so late at Night, there
you're at it, Digging, Plowing, or Lugging something or other; in a perpetual
hurry, without any regard to your Quality or Person, I Am very certain you don't
do this for your diversion. -- Perhaps you will say, I hate to see my Work go on
so slowly: Let me tell ye, Neighbor, if you would bestow but half the Pains upon
your Servants, that you do upon your Ground, your Business would go on ten
times faster


Chremes, have you so much leisure from your own Business, as to mind another
Man's that dosn't concern ye


Common Humanity, Sir, obliges me to be so concerned, as I Am a Man: And
therefore you may take what I say either by way of advice, or by way of
enquiry: that if what you do be well, I may do so too; if ill, I may divert you
from it


I have Reason for what I do: you may do as you please.


Can any Man have Reason to torment himself?


I have.


If there were any just occasion for this toyling and moyling of yours, I
shou'dn't be against it. But then I would gladly know what it is: and what ye
ha done to deserve so ill of your self


Hey ho!


Never cry for the Matter: but whatever it is let me know it: Out with it: Fear
nothing, but ^^pend upon me. I Will either condole with ye, or ^vise ye, or
assist ye in what else I can


Would ye needs know^t then?


For the very Reason I just told ye of.


I Will tell ye then.


But pray Sir, down with your Tools the mean time, and don't tire your self so.


By no means.


Pray what is your design in it?


Ah! Let me alone, that I may not indulge my self one minute.


Indeed, Sir, but I will not.


Ah! that is not fair.


Bless me! What a weight's here?


I deserve it all.


Come, come; out with it now.


I have an only Son, a Youth. -- What did I say I have? Ah Chremes! I had one
indeed; but whether I have now or no, I know not. --


Why de'e say so?


I II tell ye, Sir. -- Hard by dwells a poor old Woman of Cornith, whose
Daughter my Son began to be so fond of, that it had like to have been a Match;
and all this without my knowledge; When once I found out the Intrigue, I began
to take him to task roundly; and not with the tenderness that is due to the
Weaknesses of Youth: But extremely sharp I was, after the common ranting way of
Fathers. I was every day taunting at him: How now, said I, De'e think to go on
after this vile rate? And keep a Mistress so openly, whilst I am living? No
Clinie, you're mightily mistaken, and don't know me, if you think so; I shall
look upon ye as mine, as long as ye do what ye ought to do; but if otherwise, I
know what I ought to do, and you shall find it. I know this is only the effects
of too much Idleness; when I was at your Years I didn't give my Mind to Women;
but was forced to go a Soldier into Asia to get a Livelihood; where by the War
I got me both Riches and Honor too. At last, Matters came to that pass, that
the poor Boy hearing the same thing pressed upon him so often, and so gravely,
was brought over. And thinking my Age and Prudence better Guides than his own,
he shipped off for Asia, and went Reformade under the King of Persia there, Mr.
Chremes. --


How Is that, Sir?


He stole away without my knowledge, and has been gone a whole quarter of a
year


You're both to blame. Yet what he has done showed both an ingenuous Temper,
and a brave Spirit


When I heard of this Journey from some of his Intimado's, I went home with a
Heart full of Sorrow, my Mind half distracted, not knowing where to turn my
Head for Grief. I sat me down, my Servants all attend my beck, some help To
undress me, others run to lay the Cloth, and get my Supper ready? And all most
diligent to assuage my Grief? At sight of this, I thus began to muse: Alas!
Must so many sweat and toil for me alone? So many strive to humor me? So many
Women spend their time to adorn my House and me? Shall all these vast expenses
be for me alone? For me, whose Cruelty has driven hence my Son? My only Son,
who ought to have an equal share with me or more, since Youth can better relish
these Enjoyments. If I still keep this course of Life, no plague too great can
^^ght upon my Head. Whilst he thus lives in penury a^^cad, banished from home
by my my severily, Ill even revenge his wrong upon my self: I Will labor, spare,
(...), and scrape up all for him. With that I put my resolution in practice;
for I Have turned all things (...) of doors left neither Dish, nor Bed for use,
(...) pulld down all. I turned off all my Maids (...) Men too, except a few to
till my Land, which were no charge to me. I exposed all to Sale, and put House
to be Sold over the Door. I raised the Sum of two or three thousand Pounds, and
bought this Farm, where I toil and moil every day: I Am fully persuaded
Neighbor, I do less injury to my poor Child whilst I Am in Misery, as well as
he: nor ought I to take any manner of Pleasure till he return safe to be sharer
with me


I believe you are an indulgent Father, and he as dutiful a Son, if mamged to
the best advantage: But indeed you didn't know his Temper, nor he well yours:
And when things are so, there is no living. You never told him how much you
valued him, nor had he that confidence in you which he might have presumed
upon. If this had been, things had never came to this


Very true, Sir, I confess; but I Am most in fault.


In troth, Sir, I hope the best yet, and do verily believe you will see him safe
at home ere lon


Ah! Heavens grant I may.


I Will warrant ve, Sir. -- This is Bacchus's Day; and I should be gald of your
company ac Supper to night, if you could conveniently


I must beg your pardon for that.


Why so? -- Pray Sir give your self some little Refreshment. Im sure your
absent Son would gladl^ have it s


There is no Reason I that forced him to hardship, shoud shift it off my self.


Is that your resolution?


It Is so, Sir.


Good night to ye Sir.


And to you too.


Menedeme with his Rake upon his Shoulder. Chremes alone. I profess he has
forced Tears from me, and I cannot but pity the poor Gentleman. -- But as the
day goes it is time for me to invite my Neighbor Phania to Supper. -- Ill call
in and see if he is at home. --

Oh, I see he need not be reminded, for they tell me he is at our House already.
-- I make my Guests stay for me now: Ill in to 'em. -- But what makes the Door
go? -- who is that comes out of my House. -- I Will step a little a one side


Clinie: they have not been such a while away; I Am confident she will be here, and
the M^ssenger too in a short time. Therefore s^ake off these causeless Fears
that so torment ye


Who Is that my Son talks to?


Oh! Here Is my Father; just as I was wishing for him, Ill up to him. -- Sir, Im
glad (...) met with y


Wh^ what is the Matter?

(...) Sir, dye know our Neighbor Mr. Mean(...)?


Yes, very well.


And that he has a Son too.


Yes, I heard he is in Asia.


No, Sir, but he is now at our house.


Indeed!


I happened on him just at his Landing, and brought him hither to Supper, for
we have been very intimate form our very childhood


Your News pleases me strangely. -- What would I give now that Mr. Menedeme had
come when I invited him, that I might have been the first to have surpised him
with these joyful tidings. I believe 'tisn't too late yet


O Sir, have a care what you do, twon't be proper.


Why not?


Because he is in a great Quandary what to do with himself. He Is but just come
ashore, and is dismally afraid, both of his Father's displeasure, and his
Mistress's Inconstancy; whom he love; most entirely. 'Twas upon her account
that all this stir, and his parting from his Father was occasioned


I knowt.


He has just now sent his Footboy into the City to her, and I made our Syrus
go along with him


What says the young Man to the world?


What, Sir? why that he is the greate^ Wretch in it.


He the greatest? No man less. Does he want for any thing that the World calls
good? his Father's well, his Country happy, he has st^re of Friends, Relations
of good Quality, and (...) plentiful Estate. And these always prove good (...)
had according as the Man is; they are blessings (...) those that know how to
use 'em, but plagues (...) them that do not


But, Sir, his Father was always a cro's old Gentleman. And I Am afraid of
nothing (...) much, as that his Passion should make him (...) his Son worse
than he deserv^s


What he cross? -- I Will say no more, though, it is convenient he should stand in
some awe of his Father.


What Is that you say to your self, Sir?


I say, that however the Case stood, he ought to have staid at home. If his
Father was a little more harsh than agreed with his debauchd Inclinations, he
should have taken it patiently; for whom should he bear withal, if he cannot
with his Father? Which is most proper, think ye, the Father to live after the
Son's humor, or the Son according to his Father's: As for the young Man's
pretending he is hardly dealt by, it is no such matter. For the Severities of
Parents, (I mean such as are not excessively severe) are very much the same;
namely, they will not suffer their Sons to be always at the Bawdyhouse, nor always
at the Tavern; and will allow 'em but a little spending Money; and yet all this
is for their Childrens good. For when ones Mind is quite drencht in
Debaucheries, all that he does will have a notable Smack on it. And Son take
this for a Rule, Never to buy Wit, when you can have it at another Man's cost


I fancy so.


I Will go in, and see how Supper goes forward You know how late it is, therefore
don't be ou^ of the way.


Buying of Wit at other Men's costs. A crafty Gentleman in faith! Little does he
think that he has preached to the wind. My Mistress's Words stick more in my
Stomach by half than all his Preachments: Give me this fine thing, and buy me
that: And in faith I cannot answer her a word. There Is none so damnably put to it
as I. -- Although this Mr. Clinie has enough lying upon his own hands, yet his
Mistress is well and modestly brought up, and unacquainted with the tricks of
the Town: but mine is an imperious, craving, stately Dame: damnably expensive,
and as proud as the Devil. When she asks me for any thing, I return her a Nod;
but to tell her I have not for her, is a Mortal Sin

I did but lately these damned Tricks espy, Yet all lies hushed and kept from
Daddy's Eye





Mr. Clinie.


What a Wretch am I?


Have a care, Sir, that none of your Fathers Family drop out and see you here.


I Will look to that. -- But I Am afraid there is some mischief toward, for my
mind misgives me strangely


Do You use to judge of things, before ye know what they are.


Why, if there had not been some unlukiness in the wind, we should have seen 'em
before this time


They Will be here in a minute, Sir.


But when will that Minute come?


You don't consider that it is a great way off.' And when Women, ye know, fall
once to Powd'ring and Combing, they are an Age a rigging out


Ah, Clitipho, I Am very uneasy.


Bear up man, -- yonder comes Dromo and Syrus both together.





Just as I tell ye.


But hold, --


Do You hear that Clinie? Your Mistress will be here presently.


Yes, I do hear at last; and now am come to some Life and Sense again, Clitipho.








Do You ask me, Sir?





All Is past recovery.


-- As Jewels and fine Clothes. -- Besides it is somewhat duskish, and they know
not a step of the way. -- In sober sadness we have done like a couple of Fools.
-- Prithee D^omo, do you go back, and meet them. -- Make haste: what do you stay
for


Oh cursed misfortune, how basely have my hopes deceived me!


What Is the matter? what makes ye so concerned now?


So concerned say ye? -- Don't ye hear what a train of Servants, what Jewels
and fine Clothes she brings with her? when I left her but with one Girl to wait
upon her: where should she have all this, think ye


Po! Now I know his Distemper.





Oh Heavens! What Is become of true Faith? Whilst for your sake, Antiphila, I
fled my Native Country like a rambling Madman; you have feathered your Nest
finely at home, and left me in the midst of all my troubles. You, I say, that
are the cause of my foulest disgrace, and of my being so regardless of my
Father. Now I Am ashamed and troubled to the Soul, that he who read me so many
good Lectures upon the Tric^^ of those Creatures, lost all his Advice; and was
not able to make me leave her. But now it must be done: When it might have been
much to my advantage, then I would not, -- Not a Creature more miserable than me


Clinie has misunderstood every Syllable we were talking of. --


How Is that? prithee tell me. For I Would d^si^e nothing in the world sooner than to
find my jealousies falsely grounded


In the first place, that y^o may be sure to know all: the old Woman that went
for your Mistress's Mother was nothing related to her; and she is gone to her
long home. This by chance I heard Antiphila tell the other, as I was coming
along


Prithee what other was that?


Good Sir, have patience, and let me finish my first Story, and then I Will come
to yours


Dispatch it quickly then.


To begin; when we were got to the House, Dromo knocks at the Door; out comes
an old Woman: as soon as she had opened it, Dromo whips in, and I after him;
the old Woman claps to the Door, and falls hard to work again. And now was the
time or never, Sir, to learn how your Mistr^ss had spent her time in your
absence; since we dropped upon her unawares, and this gave us an opportunity of
making a Guess at their common Practices; which give the best Light into
Peoples Humors. We found her hard at it, making of Tapestry, meanly dressed in
a Suit of Morning, for the old woman that is dead, I suppose. She had no rich or
gaudy Attire on, but dressed like those homely Dames that have no Gallants to
see: Nor yet daubed over with nasty paint: But her Hair loosly ^hevelled, and
carelessly thrown about her Shoulders. Forbear!


Prithee honest boy, don't feed me like a Fool.


Well Sir, the old woman she spun: besides her there was a Girl weaving too
with patch't Clothes, ill dressed and very nasty


If this be true, Mr. Clinie, as I fancy it is, you are the happiest Man alive.
Didn't you mind how sluttish and nasty he said the Maid was? That Is a certain
sign Man, the Mistress is honest' when the Confident goes in Rags: for it is
always the way to Fee the Chambermaid first, before they make court to the
Mistress


Prithee, dear Rogue, on with your Story, but have a care of currying Favor by
your Flams. What said she, when you first mentioned me


When I told her you were landed; and desired her company forth with, she
immediately threw aside her Work, and could not speak for crying; which, you may
be sure, was all for your sake


As I hope for Mercy, I Am so transported, I scarce know where I am, I was in
such a fright but just now


I knew, Sir, there was nothing amiss. -- Now it is my turn, Syrus: Let Us know
who that other was


We Have brought Madam Bacchis your Mistress, Sir.


How? -- Bacchis do you say? Why ye cursed Dog whither do you bring her.


Whether do you bring her? Why to our house, Sir.


What to my Father's Sirrah?


Yes, to your Father's.


To see the Impudence of this Rascal!


Hark ye, Sir, Eaint Heart never won fair Lady.


Look to it Sirrah, shall you pretend to advance your own Reputation upo' my
cost: If you step but the least awry, I Am gone to all intents and purposes --
And what will ye do then


But Sir --


But, What?


I Will tell ye, if you will give me leave.


Prithee give him leave.


Well then.


The case is thus, -- as if --


Pox he is going to tell a Story nine hours long.


I think so too. -- Therefore, Syrus, leave fooling, and come to the point.


In troth Sir, I can hold no longer, you're grown so troublesome, that there is
no dealing with you. --





You Would have a Mistress, Sir; you would enjoy her, and be able to present her too,
but you would not run any hazard for her. Really you are wondrous wise: If it
be wisdom to aim at that which can never be. You must either take the Hazard
with the Prize, or lose the Prize and run no Hazard. Now, Sir, take which side
you love best: Tho I Am very certain the Plot I Have laid is both well contrived
and safe: First, you will have the liberty of your Mistresses Company under your
Father's Nose, without the least danger; and then by the self-same means I
shall find a Trick to nib the old Man of the Money you promised her; for which
you have so often deafen'd my Ears with your Duns. And what a Duce would you have
more


Provided it be as you say.


Hang your Provideds, cannot you run the hazard on it.


Well, come on then, your Plot, how is it laid?


Your Mistress shall go for this Gentleman^s --


Very fine! -- But prithee, what shall we do with his own then? Shall she be
clapped upon his Back too, as tho one was not enough to crack his Credit


We'll have her to your Mother's.


What to do there?


Faith, Sir, 'twill take up nine hours indeed to give ye the Why's and
Wherefore^s. It Is enough, that I have reason for it


Mere stuff! I can see nothing as yet to remove my suspicions.


Hold Sir. -- If you're afraid of this Plot, I Have another in my head, which I Am
sure you will both own to be safe enough


Prithee invent me such a one as that.


That I will in an instant. -- I Will give 'em the meeting, and pray 'em to face
about, and march home again. --


Hah! What Is that you say?


I Will rid you of your Fears with a vengeance: that you may be sure to ^leep
sound in a whole Skin. --





What you Sir? Why even make good use of --


Hark ye, Syrus, tell me truly what I should do.


Away, away, you will wish ye had, when it is too late.


Here Is a fair Opportunity offered; make good use on it while you may; you
aren't sure of having the like again


Why, Syrus, I say.


Bawl till your Heart ache, I Will on for all that.


Syrus; Syrus I say; foho Syrus. --


No Syrus; I throw my self, my Love, my Reputation too into your Hands. Ill
leave all to your determination; but see you discharge your Trust well


That Is Counsel worth laughing at in faith: As tho my Game was not at stake as
well as yours. If an unlucky cast comes up, and spoils all our Designs, you will
come off with a Reprimand, or so; But poor Pilgarlick must meet with a dry
beating. Upo' this Score, I must mind my Business very colsely. But you must
beg this Gentleman to gallant your Mistress the while


He may be sure of my assistance: And as the case stands I Am obliged to it.


Oh, Sir, I Am extremely engaged to ye.


You must take care Bacchis ben't out in her part.


Oh, she has her Lesson to a tittle.


For my part, I wonder how you could wheedle her to come so soon; for she
sometimes would scorn the very best of ye


I took her in the very critical minute, which is the most nicking Advantage:
For who should I find there but a sneaking Captain paying his Devoirs for one
single Night's Lodging; she managed this poor Devil tightly with such Artifice,
as to inflame his greedy Appetite by keeping him at Bay: and at the same time
to do a Signal piece of Service to you. -- But hark ye Sir, have a care of
making any false step: You know how plaguey shap-sighted your Father is in these
Intrigues. And I can tell, how hard it is for you to keep your self within
compass. You must have a mighty care of all double-meaning expressions, of
casting a Sheep's Eye over your left Shoulder; of sighing, spitting, humming
and jeering. --


Faith I Will act it rarely. --


See that you do then.


-- You your self shall admire me for it


But see how quickly the Ladies come after us?


Where are they? why dye hold me Boy:


You Have nothing to do with her now.


Right, not before my Father. -- But till then. --


No nor till then neither.


Come let me go.





Prithee, for one minute.


That I forbid too.


A civil Respect at least.


Get ye gone, if you have any Guts in your Brains.


Well I Am going, but what must Clini^^ do?


Stay here


He has a fine time ont!


Troop off, I say.




In troth, dear Philie, I cannot but commend ye, and think ye very happy; in
being so careful as to make your good Behavior wholly answerable to your
Beauty. As I Am a Sinner, I don't admire that all the Sparks of the Town should
die for ye, since your Discourse discovers the Sweetness of your disposition:
For my part, when I come to consider the Life and Conversation of all such as
you, who are n't common to every Coxcomb, I don't wonder to find ye so modest
and virtuous, and our selves so very little like ye. For you it is the best way
to be honest, but our Gallants will not suffer us to be so. Our Beauty makes 'em
adore us for a while, but when that is decayed, the Sparks are mad for a new
Face: So that if we didn't provide for our selves in time, we might even pine
away the rest of our days in a Desert. For you Madam, that take up with a
Person, whose Age and Nature is correspondent with your own, he wholly keeps
himself to you, and by mutual consent your Loves are made firm; and nothing can
ever separate your Hearts


I Am little acquainted with others; my self I know well enough, who always take
care that my dear Clinie's Happiness shoud be the Foundaof my own


Antiphila, it is for thy sake alone that Im come home again; for whilst I was
from thee all the Hardships I was put to were nothing to the being deprivd of
thy sweet Company





I can scarce contain my self old Boy! Is It not a plaguey thing to be debarred
of one's Humor? Hah





What young Gentleman's that which ogles us so?





For Heaven sake, what all ye my Dear?


I Am going. --


Help. -- Alas, poor Soul! -- Philie!


Clinie, or do I dream.


Who's that you see?


My Life, my Soul; Heavens bless thee. --


And thee also my long wished for dear Clinie.


How is it my dear?


Well, since I Have got you again my Dear.





Come, come, turn in: The old Man and his Supper stays for ye.


It Is just break of Day: And why shou'dn't I knock at my Neighbor's door now,
and give him the first news of his Son's Return, tho the young man I fancy will
hardly thank me for it? But when I see the poor Geneleman take on so extremely
for his Sons leaving him, how can I find in my heart to keep from him this
unexpected comfort, since his Son will be never the worse for it neither? This
must not be. For I will assist the old man to the utmost of my power. And as I
perceive his Son and mine help one another all they can, and go hand in hand
together in all their concerns; so it is but reasonable that we their Fathers
should do one another all the good Offices we are able

Time cures all things. For this absence of my Son afflicts me every day more
and more; and the longer he is away, the more I desire to see him again, and the
more I miss him





Why, Sir, have ye heard any thing of my Son then?


He Is safe and sound. Sir.


Where is he, I beseech ye?


At my House, Sir.


What my Son?


Yes, your Son.


Is he come home then?


Yes, indeed.


My Boy Clinie come home?


Even so.


Let Us be going then. -- I beseech ye, Sir, bring me to the sight of him.


But he would not for the World have ye know he is come back: He avoids your
Presence upon the account of what he has done; and is now afraid, you should be
more severe than ever


And didn't you tell him, how I was quite another man?


Not I Sir.


Why didn't ye?


Because if he finds you so soft, and give way so easily, 'twill be the whose
for him and you too


It cannot be helped; for I Have been too too severe a Father already.


Ah, Sir, you are always upon the extremes, either too profuse or too sparing;
you run into the same inconveniences by one as well as the other. Formerly you
forced your Son out of Doors rather than suffer him to keep a Mistress, who
then was contented with a little, and would have been glad to have snapp'd at
any thing: but when she was forced, by his leaving her, to grow common, and now
cannot be kept without a Mine of Money; now you give him his full liberty. For
to let you know how she is accoutred for the Ruin of Mankind; she carries at
her Heels no less than ten or a dozen Waiting-Maids, with a great luggage of
Golden Trappings; were a Prince her Gallant, he d be put to t, to maintain her:
Don t you think to do it


Is she at your House too?


She at my House say ye? -- Yes, to my cost, I ve made but one Treat for her
and her Retinue; and I faith, if I make another, I must be forced to run my
Country. To omit other Charges, what a cursed deal of Wine has she consumed me
by her tasting and sipping only: Crying, Good old Father, this same Wine is too
rough, pray, Sir, let us have some that is more smooth. I pened every Cask and
Pipe in my Cellar, and all my Servants we: as busy as so many Bees: And this
was but one nights work; what will become of you then when they ll prey upon ye
every day? As I Am ^ living Soul, Sir, I heartily pity your condition


Even let him do as he lists: Let him take it, spend it, make Ducks and Drakes
of it; I'^^ resolved to bear it, so I can but have him at h^m^ with me


If you be so much set upon it: I believe 'twill be much the better way to
conceal your Design, what're you allow him


What would ye have me do?


Any thing rather than that you intended^ Cannot you convey him Money by a
second hen^ and let your own Servant bubble ye or so? And the truth on it is, I
have an inkling that that are about some such thing already; and that they are
contriving how to do t most cleverly. My Man Syrus, he whispers with yours, and
the young Men they lay their Heads together too: And it is better to lose a Pound
this way than a Penny t other. 'Tisn't so much the Money, Neighbor, that is to
be minded, as the manne^ how to give it him with the least danger: For if he
once finds which way the Stream runs, and that you had rather part with your
Life and Money too, than lose him: Phy! What a vast Gap d^ you lay open to his
Debaucheries? So that your Life will be a burden to ye; For too much Libe^^
corrupts an Angel: Whatsoever Crotchet comes in his Crown, he will be for it
without considering whether his Demands be reasonable or no: You ll never
endure to see your Estate go to wreck, and your Son spoiled into the Bargain.
If you refuse him a Farthing; he will fall to the old Dog-trick, which he finds
will work most upon ye, and threaten to be gone forsooth


All this seems true and probable enough.


Troth, Sir, I could not sleep one wink this Night for racking my Head to
restore to you your Son


Your hand Sir. -- I hope, Sir, you will go on as you ve begun.


I m ready to serve ye.


Do You know what I mean, Sir?


Let Us hear't.


That you would hasten 'em in the Design, you perceive they have, of getting the
Money from me: For I long to give my Boy what he wants, and as much to have a
sight of him


I Will do my best, Sir, I must take my Syrus in Hand, and give him his Leston.
-- But hold some body's coming out of my House. -- You had best get out o'th
way; for fear they perceive we are plotting together. A little business at
present calls me hence; for my Neighbor Simus and Crito have some difference
about some Lands, and made me their Referree: I Will go tell 'em they must not
look for me to day, as I promised them: I Will be here again in a minute


Pray Sir do.


Chremes now, how much wiser he seems to be for me, than I am for my self?





Syrus, take this way or that way, Money must be had by hook or by crook; and
our old Fox must be trapped too


Clinies Man is a poor dull Tool, but mine is a sharper; he must do the Business.


Whose Tongue's that? -- Zookers all is spoiled? Did he hear me trow or no? --


Syrus!


What is it you, Sir?


What Is your business here?


No great matter. -- You're a brave Man, Sir, to be stirring so early this
morning, after such a rattle last Night


Why there was no hard drinking.


No hard drinking, say ye? marry, I think, you re heart of Oak.


No more of that.


This same Wench of Clinie's is a good sort of a Wench, and pleasant enough.


Ay, so I found.


And in troth has a very good Face too.


So so.


Tho, not comparable to the Women in your days: but really as the World goes
now, the Woman is very well: And I don't wonder Clinie is so desperately
smitten: But he has a Father, a covetuous, miserable, griping old Hunks, our
next Neighbor; Do ye know him Sir? -- Because he is afraid he should be
starved himself, he has turned his poor Son out a grazing; D^n^ you know what I
say to be true


Ay, Why not? -- There Is a Rascal deserves the Strapado.


What Rascal, Sir?


The dull Rogue Clinie's Man. --


(Faith Syrus I was plaguily afraid of thy Corpse.


-- That suffered all this.


What could he do?


What could he do? Why he might ha found out some device, or invented any
slight to have helped the young Gentleman to Money for his Mistress: And so have
saved the stingy old Fellow from all this vexation, whether he would or no


You're pleased to rally Sir.


It Was no more than his Duty, Syrus.


Pray, Sir, do you approve of those that put tricks upon their own Masters?


Yes, if there be just occasion for it.


Very well I faith.


Sometimes a little Tricking saves a great deal of Trouble: As in this Case,
it would have kept his only Son from rambling


Faith I cannot tell, whether he is in jest or in earnest: However he encourages
me to that which I had a plaguey mind to before


And now, Syrus, why does the Fellow ^dle away his time so, till his Master be
forc d to march off a second time, for not being able to defray his Mistress's
Charges: Will Not he raise one battery against the old Man's Pocket


The Fellow's a Fool, God bless him


You should give him one Push for the young Gentleman's sake.


Sir, I Would dot with all my Heart, if you would say but the Word; for I Am a complete
Master of that Art. --


So much the better.


-- I don't use to fail, Sir.


Why do it then.


But pray, Sir, take care to remember this, if it should chance one day to be
your Son's case, for you know we are all subject to failings


Ihope, I shall have no occasion for that.


Troth, so do I: nor do I mention this, because I suspect any such thing; but I
say again, if it should chance to happen so, that you mightn't, -- You see he is
but young. And e'dad, Sir, if that time once come, I should manage ye most
nobly


Well talk of that when that time comes. Do you mind your present ^ue?






Clitipho? Do these things become you? Hah!


What did I do, Sir;


Didn't I see ye just now with your hand in the Courtesan's Bosom?





Who I, Sir?


These very Eyes saw it: come don't stand in a lie. You deal basely by the
Gentleman that you could not keep your hands to your self. For it is a great
Affront to entertain a Friend, and then play an underhand Game with his
Mistress. How strangely uncivil you were last night at Supper too


You re in the Right on it, Sir.


And how troublesome too? That, as I Am a living Soul, I was miserably afraid it
should ha cost you a Duel. I know the humor of these Lovers is to resent
things extremely, which no body dream of


But, Sir, he has a mighty confidence in me, and knows I will not serve him an
unhandsome Trick


What then? But you might have left 'em together a little while however: Lovers
have a thousand things to say and do, which your Presence is a curb to; I know
this by my self: for I have never a Friend in the world, Clitipho, that I dare
trust all my private Actions with: I Am afraid of my Superior, and ashamed of my
Equal, lest the one should take me for a Fool, and the other for a Debauchee.
-- Suppose it to be his Case: For it is our Duty to know when and where to be
complaisant to a Friend


Do You mind what he says?


Ay, to my Sorrow.


Didn't I tell you of this before? But you have played the part of a very staid
and reserved Gentleman!


Prithee hold your Tongue.


You are in the right, Sir.


I swear Syrus, I Am ashamed of him.


So I believe, Sir: and good reason too, for it grieves me also very much.


What never a done?


Faith, Sir, I speak as I think.





Yes, in a civil way, but not as you do.


Chr. What Is that?


To order him to withdraw a little


Whither, I pray?


Whither? why whither you please, make room for the Lovers, and take a turn the
while


I take a turn? To what place?


Pish! as if ye wanted a place to walk in: take this way, or that way, or which
way you will


He says right, I Will have it so.


Confound ye for a Dog! for sending me to the De'el's Arse a peak.


Keep your Hands to your self then another time.


What say ye, Sir? What do you think will become of this Son of yours, if ye
don't, with the utmost Authority of a Father, give him due Correction and
Instruction


Let me alone for that.


Ay, Sir, and now is the time you must watch him.


I Will warrant ye.


Ay, so you had best: for he minds me every day less and less.


But hark ye Syrus, though! Have ye considered the business, I told ye of? He' ye
found any Plot according to your Mind yet


You mean about the bubbling of Menedeme. -- S't Sir! I Have just now stumbl'd
upon one


You Are a brave Lad: Prithee what is^t?


I Will tell ye, Sir: But as one thing brings out another. Chr. What then Boy?


This same Bacchis is a plaguey Jade.


So I thought.


C^rinth, to whom this Baggage had lent above thir^y ^ounds. --


Very well!


This old Woman's dead and gone, and left her young Daughter whom she, keeps in
pawn for for the Money


So then.


Her has this Bacchis brought along with the rest: and she is now in your Lady's
Apartment


Well, and how then?


She baits at Clinie to lay down the Money, and then she will give him the Girl
for an Acquittance. But she demands the full sum of Thirty Pounds. --


Does she so?


Whoo! Do You question it?


I did -- But what do you mean to do next?


Who I Sir? -- I Will away to Mr. Menedeme's tell him that this Girl was spirited
away from Caria, that she is one of a rich and noble Family, and he will get the
Lord knows what, if he will ransom her


You Have missed the Mark.


Why so, Sir?


I Will answer ye for Menedeme: I Will have nothing to do with her: What Is your
Reply


Pray, Sir, speak more to our Mind.


There Is no occasion for that.


No occasion, Sir?


No marry is there.


Why, Sir? I don't take your meaning.


I Will tell ye presently. -- Stay, stay, a little! -- What Is the meaning of this
bustle at our Door





What means my Woman by this talk, Syrus?


How is it Nurse, is it not the same think ye?


Truly, Madam, I said 'twas the same, as soon as e're I saw't.


But did ye view it well?


Oh, very well, Madam.


Do you go in; and bring me word whether she has bathed her self; the mean time
I Will wait here for my Husband.





Pshaw! What should it be? She Is only big with Fool, and wants to be delivered.


Hah, my good old Man!


And my good old Woman too.


I was looking for thee my Bird.


Well now, your pleasure.


First, I Would desire ye to believe that I would n't do any thing against your
Commands


That Is very hard to believe, but if you would have me, for once I Will believe't.


This clearing her self aforehand bodes some plaguey Mischief.


Don't you remember, when I was once big with Child, you strictly charged me
not to bring it up, if it proved a Girl


I smell out the business, you have brought it up then. Is Not it so?


If that be true, 'twill make a damned hole in my Master's Pocket.


No such matter: for I gave it to an old Woman of Corinth, a good honest
Neighbor of ours to expose it


Bless us! Was there ever such a Simpleton?


Oh me! What hurt have I done?


What hurt quoth a?


Indeed dear Husband! If I have offended 'twas ignorantly.


I know this well enough, though you had never owned it, that every thing you say
or do is ignorantly and foolishly. How many Blunders have you committed in this
one thing! First, had you, regarded my Authority, the Girl should have been made
away withal, and you shou'dn't have come with an idle flam of her Death, when
you did all ye could to save her. -- But let that pass, 'twas Fondness, and a
Mother's Tenderness: (...) bear with^t. But how rarely you have forecasted ^he
Business! And what were your Intentions? P^ay consider on it. It Is most manifest
you have betrayed your* Child to this old Woman, either for a common Prostitute,
or to be exposed to public Sale. I fancy you thought any thing would serve
turn, so her Life was saved. But why should one trouble his Head with such
Fools, who know nothing ^f Justice, Honesty or Reason: Be it better or worse,
for 'em or against 'em, they see nothing but what they list


My dear Chremes! I confess I was much to blame, and am convinc^d: And now let
me beg of ye, as Nature has made you the Wiser of the two, so be the more
generous: And let your Goodness protect my Simplicity


Well I Will forgive ye this Fault: But in sober Sadness, Wife, my good Nature
will be the spoiling of ye. But now let us hear the occasion of this Story whate
re it be


As we Women are always very foolish and superstitious; so when I gave the
Child to be exposed, I took a Ring off my Finger, and sent it with her; that,
if she died, she might have carried away some Token of our Kindness


That Is well; so you saved the Child's Life, and had your own Humor into the
Bargain too





How came ye by^t?


The young Gentlewoman that Bacchis b^ought with her, --


How!


What says she to it?


-- She gave it me to hold, whilst she went to the Bath: At first I took no
notice on it; but when I eyed it more narrowly, I knew it, and came running in
all haste to acquaint you


And what can ye suppose or gather from this Gentlewoman?


I cannot tell without you will examine her where she had it, if she can inform
you about it


My Plot's countermin'd: I find there is more in the Wind than I could wish for;
she is certainly my Master's Daughter, if this be true.


Is the old Woman alive ye delivered the Child to?


I don't know.


How did she say she had disposed on it?


Just as I ordered her.


What Is her Name, that we may hunt her up?


Philtere.


The very same, She Is as surely found, as I Am lost.


Come, Wife, let us retire.


How things happen beyond my Expectation! I was extremely afraid you would prove as
severe now, as when you gave your first Orders


A Man cannot always do, as he would, if his Estate will not afford^t: Now my
Circumstances are such, that I should be glad of a Daughter: Formerly 'twas
otherwise.


IF I am not very much mistaken, I Am in a fa^^ way to be utterly routed; all my
forces are so miserably straightened, that I shall never come of^ safe, unless I
find out some way to keep the old Man from perceiving this to be his Son's
Mistress. For to hope for one sowce of Money, or to think of topping upon the
old Fellow will be to no purpose. I shall come off nobly, and with flying
Colors, if I can compound for a Leg or an Arm. It goes to the very heart of
me, to have such a delicate bit snatched so suddenly out of my very Chaps. --
What shall I go about? -- Or what shall I invent? -- I must draw a new
Platform. -- Hanged, Diligence out does the Devil. -- Suppose I go this way to
work. -- Pox, that will not do -- Suppose that way. -- 'T will be all one. -- But
I believe this will do it. -- No, -- Yes, best of all -- I have it, I have it: I
believe I shall once more come to the fingering of that damned Run-a-gate Money







hear from the Spark --


Prithee, honest Boy, did you hear on it too?


Yes, for I was by at the discovery.


Did ye ever know any one so fortunate as I?


No, Sir.


Let me die if I Am half so glad for my own. sake as for hers, whom no blessing
can be too great for


I believe so too. Now Clinie it comes to your turn to do us a small kindness:
You must remember your Friend, that his business may be secured too, and his
Mistress be still concealed from our old Gentleman





Forbear these Raptures.


-- Shall my dear Antiphila be mine then?


Will Not ye let me speak, Sir.


What would have me do, old Soul? ^m so transported, prithee bear with me.


Faith so I do, but sore against my will.





I see my Labor's lost.


Now speak, I Am ready.


But by and by you will not.


Yes, but I will.


I tell ye, Sir, there is some care to be taken, that your Friend's Business be
secured. Now if you go away and leave Bacchis at our House, my old Master will
immediately find her to be his Son's Mistress: But if you take her along with
ye, the Intrigue will be as much i^th' dark, as ever 'twas


Ah, but Syrus, nothing makes more against my wedding than this; for with what
Face can I speak on it to my Father? Do you mind what I say


Yes.


What shall I say to him? what excuse can I pretend?


What? -- I would not have ye say one word of untruth: but even plainly tell
him the whole business. Clin. How


I Would have ye tell him your Passion for Antiphila, and that you would needs marry
her: but that this Bacchis is Clitipho's Mistress


You demand of me nothing but what is just, reasonable and easy; I suppose
you would have me beg my Father to keep all from your old Gentleman


You mistake me; I Would have your Father tell him the whole story directly, from
top to botto


How! Are you mad or drunk? In Troth you will plainly ruin him: Prithee-tell me
how he can have his Business secured, as ye say


Oh, I reckon this a M^ster-piece of my Cunning: In this P^^t I triumph in
having that mighty knack and ^^^ulty at Juggling as to cheat both of them, by
telling the truth: So that when your old Gentleman shall tell our old Gentleman
of his Sons Mistress, he shall laugh at it


So you ^^ce more destroy all my hopes of Matrimony: F^^ as long as Chremes
believes her to be my Mistre^^; he will never venture his Daughter upon me.
^^rhaps you don't care whether I sink or swim, so you can but serve Clitipho's
turn


What ^ Pox! Do You think I Would have ye act the Cheats for ever? One day serves my
turn, till I Have fingered the Money, that is all: Not a bit longer do I desire


Will one day serve? But what if his Father should find out all i^th mean time?


Right! And what if the Sky should fall!


I dread what will come on it.


Dread? A Fiddle-stick! As if you weren't ^ble to slip your Neck out o^ the
Collar, when ^ou please; you may clear all by making a full discovery


Well come on then, let Bacchis be brought over then.


That Is very well. -- Here she comes.




Ciitipho's Mind is big with expectation, I Will baffle 'em and not come at all;
and then Syrus's Back shall ^^undly smart for it


Sy^^^.


Do You think she is in jest, Sir? She Will as fairly ourform it, if I don't look to
my hits


^^rygia, did you take notice of Charine's House which the Man showed us just
now


I did Madam.


It Is the very next House on the Right^and. Phr. I remember it.


Hie you thither, full speed: For the Captain is just now with Charine at
^acchus's Feast


What a Devil's to do now?


Tell him I Am here sore against my will, and am kept by force: But I Will have a
trick to get rid of 'em, and come to him strait.


S death! I Am at my last Prayers





The Guineas are just ready, Madam.


Then I Will stay.


You shall receive em in a minute.


As you please for that: Do You see me in such haste for 'em?


Pray, Madam, do you know, what you are to do?


What?


You must just step over to Menedeme's, and all your Train must go too


Ye impudent Dog, what do you mean?


To coin Money for your Ladiship's use?


Do You think me a fit Person to play upon thus?


No, I Am in earnest, Madam.


Have I any business with you there?


No, Madam, but there I Will pay you the Money.


Let Us be going then.


Come this way, Madam.


Bacchis led out by Clinie, and Phrygia.


Soho, Dromo.


Who calls?


It Is I.


What Is the Matter?


Bring over all Bacchis's Servants to your House quickly.


Why so tho?


Don't stand to ask Questions, let em carry all their Baggage with em too: The
old Gentleman will think his Charge is lessened as soon as his House is clear
o^th Lumber: Faith he little thinks he shall pay sawee for it at the long run:
And you, Dromo, if you have any Wit, take not the least notice of what you know


You Will say, I Am a perfect Mute.




Indies. -- Oh, here is Syrus very seasonably.


Why don't I board him?


Ha! Sir!


What makes ye so merry?


I Have wished for ye this half hour.


I fancy you ve been tampering with the old Gentleman about somewhat.


You mean that which we discoursed of just now -- No sooner said, but done.


In good earnest?


Yes, Sir, in good earnest.


Faith I cannot forbear stroaking thee. Come hither ye little Rogue, I ll
remember thee for this: E'dad I will


Ah, Sir, if you knew how prettily it jumped into my Brain.


Pho! D ye pride your self 'cause of your good Luck?


Troth, not I: I only speak the truth.


L^^ hear t then.


Clinie has told his Father that Bacchis is your Son's Mistress: and that he
brought her thither only to cast a Mist before your E^es


Very well!


Pray tell me what ye think on it.


'Twas admirable, I swear.


Clinie tells him he has seen your Daughter, is much taken with her, and has a
Mind to marry her


What she that we ve just found to be ours?


Yes, Sir. -- And he will desire his Father to get your consent.


Why so, Syrus? I don't understand any reason for it.


Pshaw! you're so dull of Apprehension.


Like enough.


His Father is to give him Money for the Wedding, to -- you take me, Sir?


To buy him a Wedding-suit, I warrant.


Right, right.


But I Will neither give him my Daughter, nor my Promise.


No, Sir? Why not?


Why not, say ye? Do You think I Will marry her to a --


As you please for that; I didn't say you should let him have her for good and
all; but only pretend it


I hate such Pretenses. -- Plot as you please, so as you don't make me one of
the Plot. Shall I promise to give my Daughter when I don't intend to do any
such thing


I was in hopes you might.


Not a bit on it.


In Troth it might have been done cleverly; I had never undertook it, had not you
urged me to it


I grant it.


But however, Sir, my Intentions were good.


I d have ye by all means do your best to cheat Menedeme, but then I d have ye go
another way to work


So I will, Sir, we'll find out one. -- But for the Money I told ye your
Daughter owes to Bacchis, that must be paid down upo' the Nail. Neither will
you (I presume) shift it off by saying, What is t to me? Did she lend me the
Money? Was It done by my Orders? What had she to do pawn my Daughter, without my
consent? As for that, the old Saying s true, You may have much Law of your
side, and but little Equity


I ll have none of these shifts.


Though others may do it, yet 'twon't look well in you, for the whole Town counts
you a rich Man, and very well to pass in the World


Well then I ll go, and pay the Money my self,


You d better order your Son to do that.


Why so?


Because he now goes under the Name of her Gallant. Chr. What of all that?


Why if he carry't himself, the thing will look as if it had something of truth
in it: And by that means I shall the more dexterously bring about my own design
too -- Oh, yonder is the Man, you would best step in and fetch the Money


So I will.




Bacchis. --


Keep ^ur Curses to your self (if you go to that) I Am (...) Ill Nature had
liked to have brought my Neck to a Halter.


OF my Soul, I wish it had! I Am sure 'twas no more than you deserved.


Than I deserved. -- How so pray? I Am glad I know so much of your Mind before
ye received the Money I just got ready for ye


What could I have said less to ye? You went and brought my Mistress hither, and
then not suffer me to come nigh her


Well, I have done, I Am cool again. -- But can you guess where your Mistress is?


Why at our House?


No but she is not.


Where then pray?


At Mr. Clinie^s.


All Is gone.


Courage, Sir: You your self shall go to her with the Money promised her
presently


Thou pratest like a Fool; Where should I have it?


From your own Daddy.


You only banter me.


You Will soon see that.


Nay then I Am made for ever, Syrus! -- Dear Rogue, let me buss thee.


'St! there comes your Father. -- Have a care you don't play the Fool, and make
a wonderment at the Matter; observe the Motion; do as you're bid, and ask no
Questions




Where Is this Clitipho now?


Say, here Sir --


Here he is, Sir.





Most of it, Sir.





Zookers: Why do you stand like a Post? Why don't ye take it?


Giv't me if you please.


Follow me as fast as you can. --






So my Daughter has got Thirty good Pounds of me already, which account goes
for her Board. I suppose the other Thirty must follow for fine Clothes. After
this comes a round Sum for a Portion. Well! This same Custom is the Devil. Now
must I leave all Works to find some honest Fellow to ease me of that Money I Have
been so long scraping together










Chremes! 'twas you I wanted. -- Now, Sir, you may be the making of my Son, my
self, and Family; and I beg you would do it


Good Sir, What would ye have me do?


It seems you have found out a Daughter to day. -- My Son Clinie desires your
Consent to marry her


Bless me! What a strange Man are you?


What do you mean?


Have ye so soon forgot the Trick we talked of just now, which was to be played
to chouse you of your Money? --


I remember it.


-- Why this is it they are now at work upon. --


What is it you say Chremes?


-- I ll warrant ye, this same Bacchis at your House is my Son's Mistress too;
Is she not


They say so.


And you believe it?


Yes, that I do.


Then they pretend that your Son has a Mind to be married: So that when I Have
promised him my Daughter, you may let him have Money to buy Wedding-Cloaths and
the like


That Is the business then, he wants it for his Mistress. Chr. No doubt on it.


Alas unhapp^ Man! My Joys are nipt in the bud: And yet I Would rather endure any
thing than part with him again. -- What answer, Sir, shall I carry from ye,
that he may not perceive I Have found it out or lay it to Heart


To Heart say ye? -- Pshaw! Menedeme you cocker him too much by half.


Let it be so: I Am gone too far to draw back: -- I beg, Sir, but the
continuance of your Favors


You may tell him we met and treated of the Match; --


Well, and what more?


-- That I Am ready to do any thing: that I like him for a Son-in-Law: And
lastly, if you please you may tell him I Have given my Consent


Oh that is it I Would have.


That he may ask ye for the Money the sooner, and you the sooner part with it
according to your Wish


That Is what I aim at.


In Troth, by what I can see, you will quickly be cloyed with this Son of yours;
but as the Case stands, if you have your Wits about ye, you must give it him very
cautiously, and little by little


So I will.


You had best go in and see how much he would have, I shall be at home, if you want
me


It Is that I Would have, for whatever I do I shall make you acquainted with. Exeunt.


FOr my part, I must own my self to be somewhat silly, and slow of
Apprehension: But my Neighbor here, this same Assistant, Counselor, and sage
Direct ^^o mine out-does me a bar and a half. All the honorable Titles of a
Fool, Blockhead, Clod-pate, Ass, and Dolt, may well enough be appl'd to me; but
they will not come up to him: for his Folly is beyond all Expression




Clitipho and Syrus stay so long at Mendeme^s.


Who are those that stay so long, Chremes?


Hah; Mr. Menedeme are you got hither again? -- Well, Sir, did ye tell your Son
what I said


Every Syllable, Sir.


And what says he to it?


He was as much transported, as if he had a mind to be married.


Ha, -- ha, -- he. --


What do you laugh at?


My Man Syrus's Trick came just into my Mind. Men. Indeed?


This cunning Rogue has a knack of setting other Peoples Faces as well as his
own


You mean my Son only counterfeits his Joy. Chr. Yes, Sir.


This very business came in my Head too.


Ah he is a pickled Rogue.


You Would say so indeed if you knew all.


Say ye so?


Pray, Sir, give me the hearing.


But hold. -- First, I desire to know how much you have thrown away upon 'em: For
as soon as you told your Son I had promised him my Daughter, immediately Dromo,
I Will warrant ye, clapped in a Word, that the Bride wanted Wedding Clothes,
Jewels, Attendants, and the like, that you might give 'em Money for 'em


Not a word.


How! not a word.


No, indeed.


Nor your Son neither.


Not a tittle, Sir, but was only very urgent to ha the match struck up to day.


You amaze me. -- But what did my Man, did he say nothing too?


Nothing at all.


How so, I beseech ye!


Nay, I cannot tell. -- But I admire that you should see other things so well,
and not this. -- Pshaw! It Is only Syrus has set your Son's Face too so
admirably well, that no Man could suspect in the least this Bacchis to be my
Boy's Mistress


How Is that!


I Will not say a word of their kissing and clipping: for I reckon that nothing.


What more could be done to carry on the Counterfeit? Men. Pish!


What is it, I beseech ye?


Well, observe then. -- I Have a little withdrawing Room at the back part of my
House; where a Bed was brought in and made up


What followed?


What? -- Why thither went Clitipho.


All alone? Men. Yes alone.


My Mind misgives me strangely


Immediately after him went Bacchis


All alone too. Men. Ay, all alone too


I Am ruined.


As soon as they were in, they made fast the Door.


How! -- Was your Son a Looker on all the while.


Why not? He and I saw it together.


Ay, Menedeme, she is certainly my Son's Whore then. I am absolutely undone.


How so?


I have scarce where withal to keep House for ten days.


What! Are ye concerned that he should help his Friend a little?


No, but for fear he should keephis she Friend.


Yes, if he should indeed.


Do You question that? -- Do You know any one of such a base and poor Spirit, as to
suffer his own Mistress before his Face to be. -- Men


Ha -- ha -- he. Why not? That I might the easier be imposed upon.


Do You jeer me, Sir? -- Now what reason have I to curse my own Stupidity? How
many signs ha they given me to discover the Cheat, had not I been a downright
Stock? what things have I been an Eyewitness to? Fool that I am! -- But as I Am
a living Soul they shall not go off Scotfree: for immediately I Will --





My Anger quite distracts me Menedeme.


That you should say such a word now. Is Not that a great failing in you to
advise others, and be so wi^e abroad, and yet cannot help your self at home


What course shall I take?


The same which you said I was so defective in -- Make him sensible that you
are his Father, that he may venture to trust all his Secrets, wants and desires
with you alone, lest he seek his redress elsewhere, and cry, Good bw'ye Father


Ay, let him be jogging to Jericho for me, rather than here by his Debaucheries
bring his poor Father to a Crust. For, Menedeme, if I go on thus to supply all
his Extravagances, I shall quickly come to your Hedging and Ditching


What a great many Troubles will ye pull down upo' your Head, if you don't look
about ye: you will show your self a rigid Father, and pardon him at last, when he
will not give ye one good word for your pains


Ah, Sir! You cannot conceive how much it goes to the Heart of me


What you please for that. -- But what say ye to my proposal? will you marry
your Daughter to my Son? or have ye another in your Eye, that you like better


No; I like him for a Son-in-law, and I like the Alliance too.


What Money shall I tell him you will give with her? -- What no answer? --





Yes, Sir.


Ah, Sir!


Come Chremes, don't trouble your self, though it be but a little; Portion shall
break no Squares


I designed her indeed no more than Three hundred Pounds, being all my Estate
would bear: But if you tender the Welfare of me, my Estate, and Son, you may
tell him I Have promised to give all I Am worth for a Portion


What Project are ye framing now?


You may pretend to wonder at it, and ask him too why I did it.


And so I may, for I cannot conceive, why you should do it.


No? -- Why to curb, and cool his Couage, now solely bent to Luxury, and
Debauchery, and bring him to that pass, that he shall not know where to turn
himself


What do you mean?


Pray, Sir, let me have my Humor in this thing.


Well! -- But would ye have me do so indeed?


Yes.


Then I will, Sir.


Well, Sir, let your Son get ready, and send for his Bride. As for mine I Will
rattle him to some Tune, as Fathers should do their Children. -- But for that
Dog Syrus. --


What will ye do to him?




What? If I live, I Will so lace his Jacket, and curry his Hide for him, that he
shall remember^t as long as he has an hour to breath: -- Damned Rogue, to think
to make a Laughingstock and May Game of me; I Will be hanged if the Rascal dare
have served a poor friendless VVidow so, as he has served me.




Menedeme, is it come to that then? that my Father should so suddenly cast off
all natural Affection? For what Offense? What grievous Crime have I miserable
Fellow committed? I do but what all ^oung Persons commonly do





Didn't ye say my Father was hard by?


Yes, there he walks.


What do you blame me for Clitipho? what I have done was to cure thee, and the
rashness too: when I saw you of that sluggish Nature, and were all for the
present Enjo^ment, without considering the Future; I then took a Method to
secure you from want, and my Estate from ruin. And seeing I could not make ye
m^ ^ei^, as by Nature I ought, I had recourse to your highest Relations, making
over and trusting all ^o their Hands. There you will ever find Sanctuary for you^
Miscarriages, meet with Diet, Clothes, and a House to hide. your head in


VVoe's me!


This is better than by making you my Heir, to let Bacchis run away with all.


I Am undone! What a Storm has my Rogueship raised before I was a ware --


Would to God I were dead!


Pray learn first what it is to live, when you have tried that and don't like it,
then die if you will


Good Sir, will you hear me one word.


Speak then.


But may I freely, Sir?


Speak I say.


What Injustice and Madness is it, that he should be punished for my Offense,
--


It Is done; don't you meddle nor make. No body impeaches you Syrus; therefore
you needn't look out for a Sanctuary, or one to plead for ye


Pray, Sir, what is your design?


I Am neither angry with you nor him, nor ought you to be so with me for what I
have done




He Is flung away. -- Pox! would I had asked him. -- Clit. What Syrus?


-- Where I should have had my Bellytimber, since he has turned us out of
doors, -- You it seems may mump it at your Sisters


Am I reduced to this then, that I must starve for want of Bread?


However whilst there is Life there is hopes. --


Of what?


-- Of a good coming Stomach.


Are ye so gamesome in time of Adversity? And not give me one push at this dead
lift


Yes, Sir, I Am ready for it, and was hammering on it all the time your Father was
Schooling of ye -- And as far as I can perceive. --


Prithee what?





Pray what is it?


The Case is thus: For my part, I don't believe you are any of their Son.


'How's that Syrus? Art mad?


I Will tell ye my Reasons, judge of 'em as you please. -- Whilst they had none
but you, and you alone were all their Joy, they then cocker'd you up, and gave
ye any thing. But now they have found a Daughter, they have found an occasion to
send you packing


That seems very probable.


Do You think he would have been so damned mad for a Peccadillo else?


I cannot think he would.


There Is another business to be well considered: All Mothers you know are
Pleaders for their Sons Faults, and constantly take their parts against their
Fathers: But here we see no such matter


Very true, Faith; therefore good Boy, tell me what to do.


Even put it to 'em to resolve ye that Scruple, and don't mince the Matter: If
it be false you will work upon their Affections: If true, you will know your own
Parents


Your Counsel's good, I Will follow it.




E^gad this was a lucky Hit: for the less hope the Spark has, he will much the
sooner make his Peace with his Father, and at his own Terms too. -- Perhaps the
Toy may take him i^th' Crown to tie himself to a Wife; but God-a-mercy to
Goodman Jobber Knowles here. Considering what has been done, I wonder he didn't
order me to be trussed up with a Whip-stitch before now. -- I Will betake me to
Mr. Menedeme's, and get him beg me off. I Will never trust this old Fellow.




In Troth, my dear Husband, if you ben't very cautious, you will make the Boy do
himself some mischief. And I cannot but admire how such a Whim came into your
Head


You Will be a Woman still! Cannot I do any thing but you must thwart me
presently, Mrs. Impertinence? -- Put the Case I should ask ye what is amiss
in it, or upon what account 'twas done, you cannot answer me. Therefore why do ye
so confidently oppose me, ye old Fool


Cannot I answer ye?


Yes, yes, you can, I Would rather grant that, than tell the Story a hundred times
over


What an unreasonable thing it is to make me stand like Mum-chance at such a
time as this


I don't make ye, speak your Heart out, I Will do as I please for all that.


Will ye so?


Yes by Cocksnowns will I.


You don't consider the ill consequence of it. He Will think himself a Foundling.


A Foundling say ye?


Indeed, dear Husband he will.


And you may so too.


Oh I beseech ye, let them say so that hate 's most: Shall I say he is none of
my Son, that is my Son


What? Are ^e afraid you cannot make it ou^ he is your Son whene're you please.


What because he is so like my new found Daughter?


No, but because he is so like you in Humors, which is a more convincing
Argument by half: That way you will easily prove him your own: For he resem bles
ye extremely: There Is never an ill quality in him, but you have the same:
Besides there is not another Woman upon God's Earth, that could have had such a
Son -- But here comes the Youth. -- How gravely he looks. When you view him
thoroughly, you will know what he is







For Heaven's sake dear Child, never so much as think you had your being from
any but us Clit. I cannot help it.





And, Jackanapes, if you have any Reverence for your Father. Let me see any
more of these Tricks, and you had better eat your Nails


What Tricks, Sir?


If you must needs know, I Will tell ye. The Tricks of an^ impertinent, idle,
cheating, drinking, whori^g, con^uining Debauchee. -- Believe what I say, and
don't donbt but that I am your Father


Does this come from a Fahter's Mouth?


No! Though you had sprung out o^ my fertile Brain, as Pallas they say did from
mighty Jove's, I Would not endure my self to be disgraced by your lewd Tricks.


The Gods forbid that.


I know not what the Gods will do, but I Will do my endeavor to prevent the
worst. --


Alas! How mad am I with my self! How ashamed of my self! I cannot so much as
see which way to begin to pacify him




Chremes handles the poor young Gentleman too severely, and too roughly;
Therefore I Am come to make up the Breach again. -- Oh, best of all; there they
are


Oh Mr. Menedeme, Why is not my Daughsent for to your House? And the Writings
drawn about the Portion we agreed upon


For God's sake Husband never do that.





Pray do, Mr. Chremes; let his Repentance win upon ye so far.


Shall I in my right Senses part with my whole Estate to a Baggage. -- I Will be
twice advised first


That we'll take care to prevent.





Come, come sweet Husband do.


Prithee Mr. Chremes don't be so obstinate.


What means all this? -- Well, I perceive, I must not do what I designed.


Now you do like a worthy Gentleman.


But then upon this Condition, that he shall do as I shall think most proper for
him


I Will do any thing, Sir, pray command me.


I Would have ye Marry.


But Sir. --


I Will take no Excuses.


I Will engage for him, he shall do it.


But he himself says no such matter.


My Case is desperate.


What do you boggle for Clitipho?


Nay let him even take his own way.


He shall do as you would have him.

Sost. Marriage is a Bug bear to Fools, but they that have tried it find it a
Blessing





Phanacrates's Daughter.


Pho! That Carrat-pated, Wall-eyed, Pimple-faced, Hook-nosed Creature? It goes
against me, Sir


Loy ye now, how nice he is grown! -- You may guess what his Mind has been mos^
upon





No need of that: Since I must marry, I Have just one in m^ own Eye, which I like
very well


That Is my good Boy!


Archonides's Daughter.


That Is as well as I could wish.





What Is that?


To pardon Syrus all he has done for my sake.


Well, I will.

Gentlemen,

Fare ye well, and give us your approbation.



