The Eunuch. A COMEDY, Acted at the Feast of Cybele, WHEN L. Postumius Albinius
and L. Cornelius Merula were Curule Edil's, By the Company of L. Ambivius
Turpio, and L. Attilius of Preneste

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was performed on two
Right-handed FLUTES

It was taken from the GREEK of Menander;

Acted twice under the Consulship of M. Valerius, and C. Fannius.

A. U. C. 593. before Christ 156.

Scene, ATHENS,

The Time Six or Seven Hours.

The Street before s Door. The Forenoon.


Troth Sir, if you could hold out at this rate, 'twou'd be the best and bravest
thing you ever did: but if ye begin upo'th^ Huff, and your Heart not serve ye
to go through with it; if you faint in the Enterprise, and go before you're sent
for, or so much as reconciled, and sneakingly tell her, You're so entirely
devoted to her, as not to live an hour without her, your business is done to
all Intents and Purposes. She Will ride you to death when she has you at mercy.
-- Wherefore I Would have you be twice advised before it be too late. For alas Sir,
what will reason or moderation signify in a Case that will bear neither: For
Love you know is strangely whimsical, containing Affronts, Jealousies, Jars,
Parlies, Wars, then Peace again. Now for you to ask Advice to love by, is all
one as if you ask advice to run mad by. -- As for your present Resolutions
while your Blood is up, What go to her? When a Rival's preferr^d? My self
refused? Even Entrance denied me? Never persuade me to^t; I Will die first. I Will
make her know I Am none of her Cully. Why ^n good faith Sir, one pitiful
hypocritical Drop of a Tear, which this Creature can hardly for her Soul
squeeze out of her Eyes with all her scrubbing, will confound all this bluster,
bring you to your whining Peccavi, and make you submit to ^er Ladyships's mercy


Oh horrid shame! -- Now I see she is a ^ursed Jilt, and I^a miserable Fool; I Am
sick on it, ^et I die with Love; then I perish with my Know^^dge and Senses
about me, both living and look^ng on. And I know not what to do


What should you do Sir, but free your ^^lf from her as cheap as you can? If
you cannot ^^aw the Stake fairly, make the best of a bad ^^me, and never stand
vexing your self for the ^^tter


Do You think that is the best way?


Ay Sir, if you know the best way. -- Add no more Troubles to those that Love
has ^rought on^ye; but bear what is already befaln ^^ like a Man. --



Oh yonder comes the Cater-pillar that spoils all our ^aivest, and leaves us to
starve.


Phedrie should take it worse, or otherwise than I intended, that I did not let
him in yesterday


Ah Parmeno! I Am all over in a cold sweat at the very sight of her.


Brisk up Sir! To her I say, she carries Fire enough to warm ye with a vengeance


Phedrie! What are you here? And waiting at the Door too? why didn't ye come in
without any more ado


The De^el a word's here of shutting the Door upon us.


What Speechless my Dear?


Well asked Madam! for these Doors were always wide open to me, and I the
highest in your Ladyship's Favors.


Let these things pass my Dear.


Thais, Thais, would that you and I did but love equally, and went an even
pace: that what you have done might trouble you as much as me: or that I might
concern my self as little at it, as you do


Phedrie, for by this light twasn't because I loved or cared for any body more
than thy dear self, but as the case stood ^twas a thing not to be avoided


Likely enough: that is usual. -- She poor Soul shut him out of doors out of
stark Love and Kindness.


Parmeno? -- Well, well, go on: --


We'll hear ye for once.


First let me know, whether this Man here can keep Counsel.


Meaning me Madam? -- The rarest Fellow i the world at it; but we must enter
into Articles about keeping your Secrets; if the Story be true, I am as mute as
a Fish; but if it be a falsity, a Foppery, or a Flam, 'twill out in an instant,
I Am full of holes, and run like a Seive. Therefore pray Madam, not a word of a
Lie as you hope for Secrecy


My Mother was born at Samo, but lived at Rhodes.


Mum, mum for that.


There it was that a certain Merchant presented her with a fine young Girl
Kidnapp'd from Attica


Was she a Gentlewoman?


I suppose so: We could not tell for a certain. She told us her Parents Names;
as for her Country, and other Tokens she forgot, nor could it be otherwise
expected because of her Age. The Merchant added withal, that he understood by
the Pirates (of whom he bought her) that she was stolen from Sunio hard by
Athens -- No sooner did my Mother take charge on her, but she gave her the best
Education she could, and bred her up like her own Child: So that we were
generally taken for Sisters. In company with that Stranger (the only person I
was then engaged withal) did I come hither, who left me all I have at present





Why so?


Because forsooth one Dish to be sure would never satisfy you, neither was he
your sole Benefactor; for this Gentleman's Pocket has smoaked to some Tune for
most of your Bravery


Be it so: But cannot you let me go on with my Stor? -- Caria, mean time I got
acquainted with thee my dear Rogue. And thou know how dearly I have loved
thee e're since, even to the trusting thee with the greatest of my Secrets. --


Parmeno will let go again.


You may swear it, Sir.


For Loves sake, dear Hearts! hear me out -- Not long after my Mother died at
Rhodes; now my Uncle, you must know, was a little given to the World, and
perceiving the Girl was very likely, and had a good hand at the Lute, hoped to
make Money of her, and forthwith exposed her to Sale, and made his Markets on
her. As good Luck would have it, my Friend the Captain being there, buys her
for a Present for me, being perfectly ignorant of this whole Affair. He Is just
come to Town, and perceiving what is between you and I, he invents many Excuses
and Flams to put off his parting with her as long as he can: But says, could he
but persuade himself I loved him better than you, and were he not miserably
afraid that when I once got her I should turn him off, he would part with her
presently. This he is still afraid of, but as far as I can perceive he has a
hankering after her himself


And is it got no farther than hankering?


No, for I ve made strict enquiry -- Now my dear Phedrie, I Have a thousand
Reasons why I Would wheedle him out of her. First, because she goes for my Sister;
and then to restore her to her Friends; for I Am a lonesome Woman here, no body
with me, neither Friend nor Kinsman; therefore I hope by this good Office to
make my self Friends; therefore if you love me help me out in the Management of
this business: Let this Swaggerer be Master of Mis-rule for two or three days
-- What no Answer


Thou basest of thy Sex! -- What shall I answer thee, who dealest so
ungratefully by me?


O rare Master of mine! Gramercy say I: He Is touched now -- E'dad you are a Man
every Inch of thee


As if I didn't know what you would be at. -- A young Girl was Kidnapp'd hence,
-- my Mother bred her up like her own, -- she went for my Sister -- Id fain
wheedle him out of her -- and restore her to her Friends -- All this stuff is
to shift me off, and to take in your Captain forsooth; But why I pray? Only
because he is more in your Ladyship's Favor than I am? and you're plaguily
afraid this Girl will put your Nose out of joint, and take your Iusty Stallion
from you


Who I afraid on it?


Ay you: Why should you be so concerned else? Is he the only Person that has
made you Presents? Did ye ever find me close fisted? The Other day you asked for
a Black, didn't I go Post haste and get you one? And then you would have your
Eunuch forsooth, purely, because your Ladies of Quality have 'em, this I got
too: I Am sure yesterday I paid down of the nail no less than fifty Guineas for
'em both. Tho I Am slighted by ye, yet you see I didn't forget ye; and my Good
nature's finely rewarded


How Is this my Phedrie! No, though I should be very glad to have this Girl, and I
believe I might this way as easily as may be; yet rather than disoblige thee, I
ll do what thou wou'd'st have me


Oh that that word came from your Heart now rather than disoblige thee. Could I
but believe that was spoken sincerely, I could then bear any thing


He staggers: one damned wheedle has don't in a trice.


Ah dear! Don't I then speak from my Heart? When did I ever deny you a Request,
tho 'twere made but in a jest? And yet I cannot for my Soul obtain the Favor of
your absence but for two days


Ay if it were but two days -- But what if that two should prove twenty?


Indeed Sir, It shall be no more than two or --





It shall be no longer indeed. Let me prevail with thee for once.


Well for once you shall have your Mind.


Now I love thee most wonderfully, thou have so obliged me.


Well I ll into the Country, and there pine away for these two days. -- That Is
my Resolution since my cruel Dear must have her Humor. -- But Parmeno, do you
take care to deliver the Eunuch, and Black in my absence


I will Sir.


God b'uy my dearest Thais, for two long days.


God b'uy to thee my sweet Creature. Have you any other Commands?


What can I desire further; but that tho the Captain has your Company, yet your
Heart may be at another place: Let me both night and day be the Entertainment
of your Love, your Wishes, your Dreams, your Expectations, your Thoughts, your
Hopes, your Pleasure, your All. In fine, let your Heart be as much mine, as
mine is your



Dear Heart! I Am afraid Predrie believes not one word of what I have said, but
takes me for one of your Jilting Creatures of the Town. But I that know my own
Heart best, am sure, I Have devised no Flams; nor is there any Soul I love so
fondly and tenderly as this Gentleman. And whatsoever I have done in the case
was purely for the sake of the poor Girl, whose Brother, a person of some
Repute, I hope I Have in a manner found out. To day he appointed to give me a
visit, I ll step in and wait his coming


DO as I ordered ye, Let the Presents be carried.


So they shall Sir.


But with care then.


It shall be done, Sir.


But with speed too. Par. It shall so.


Have I ^^'d ye enough on it.


All! That's a Question indeed?

As though 'twas so hard a piece of business. -- For my part Sir, I wish with all
my Soul that you were as sure of winning a Thousand pounds as ye are of losing
these Presents


Prithee don't trouble your Head about those things, for if I lose them I lose
my self too, which is far the greater loss


It shall not trouble me, but I ll do your Business effectually. -- Have you any
further Commands for me


Be sure you set off the Presents with all the Commendations you can; and give
my Rival all the Interruption imaginable


Pshaw! I Would have done that without your bidding.


Well I ll into the Country; and there tarry.


I fancy so.


Parmens.


What Is your pleasure, Sir?


Do really think I can have so much power over my self as to hold out my
whose time


Who you Sir? No Faith: For either you will come back again presently, or else
your want of sleep will send ye hither at Midnight with a Whynot


I Will tire my self as much as I can, that I may sleep whether I will or no.


Twon't do Sir, tire your self as much as ye please, you will be never the nearer


All this signifies nothing Parmeno. -- I must break the neck of this
est^minate Humor; I indulge my self too much; in short, do you think I cannot
live without her three whole days if occasion serve


How Sir! What three live long days? For shame Sir!


Nay I Am sully resolved upon it however.




But who comes yonder in the Name of Goodness? Ha, ha, it is that wheadling
Rascal Gnatho, a hanger on of the Captains. He has got the young Gentlewoman by
the Fist, as a Present to his Lady. -- Bless me what a smug-faced little Rogue
it is. No wonder if I make but a scurvy Figure to day with my old rotten
Eunuch. -- Why this Creature cuts out Thais her self


What Is the meaning of this fine Dress? quoth I, Alas! (said he) I had an Estate
once, but played the Fool and coudnt keep it, and you see what Im brought to:
All my Friends and Acquaintance fly me as they would the Plague -- Here I began
to look down upon him with scorn: Why you whoreson Blockhead, said I, is it come
to that then, that you hadnt left your self an Aftergame? Have ye lost your
Brains and your Money together? Why do but look on me, who was once in the same
Case with your self? How fresh and sparkish, how Genteel I go, and how strong
and lusty I am? I have the Indies at Command, tho Lands I have none; and tho I
have scarce a Groat in the world, yet I want for nothing. But (says he) Im of
such an unluckly Constitution that neither buffooning nor beating will agree
with me. How Is that, said I, do you think that is the way? No you're plaguily wide
of the Mark. In the days of Yore this might have done well enough: but we are
now in another Method, and perhaps I was the Inventer of it too -- There Is a
sort of people in the World who ^et up for Wits of the first Rate, and yet have
no more Brains than Maggots: Now these are the Men for my turn: but then I am
not their Merry-Andrew to make them sport, but very readily make sport at them,
tho at the same time I praise their parts to the Skies. If they say any thing,
I cry it up too. If they unsay it, I commend 'em for that too: What they deny,
I deny: What they affirm, I affirm: In fine, Ive brought my self to be just of
their Mind in every thing: and by this means, I get many a sweet Bit, and a
sweet Penny


A very pretty Fellow upo' my word! Give him a Fool and he will make him a
Madman. Aside


Whilst this Chat lasted we got to the Marketplace, where I was joyfully met
by a Troop of Confectioners, Fishmongers, Butchers, Cooks, Pastrymen,
Fishermen, and Poulterers; all of my old Cronies whom I had been a good
Customer to before, and since I had spent my Estate, and am so still: They
Complimented me with Hat in Hand, invited me to Supper, and were very glad to
see my Worship: when my poor hunger-starvd Comrade saw I was so highly in their
Books, and live so bravely at ease, he begged of me for Heaven's sake to teach
him a little of my Art. I bid him follow me, and be my Pupil; and as the Sects
of Philosophers borrowed their Names from their Masters, so all that have
learned the Art of Wheadling should from me be called Gnathonicks


To see the virtue now of living at ease, and being fed at another Man's Table


But hold Im plaguey backward in handing this present to Mrs. Thais, and to
invite her to the Treat -- Parmeno our Rival's Servant all in the dumps before
the door: Our Business goes swimmingly on; these Sparks will have but a cold
Suit on it -- I Am resciv'd to have a little sport with this poor Rogue


I warrant they think this Gift will make the Lady theirs for ever.


My nown dear Friend! Gnath^'s thy very humble Servant. Well what are ye upon
now


Upon my Legs.


I I see that. -- But don't ye see something here that offends your Eyesight.


Yes you.


That I believe too. -- But is there nothing else?


Why what should there be?


Because, my Friend, you seem to be a little out of Humor.


Not in the least.


Nay I would not have ye do so. -- But what think ye of this Present? Hah!


Why she is tolerable.


I Have galled him I see.





Will Not Madam Thais be mightily taken with this Present think ye?


As much as to say our Nose is out of joint: But hark ^e Friend, every Dog has
his day; there is a time for all things


Now, Parmeno will I give thee a Holy Day for this half Year; and save thee the
trouble of trotting up and down, and sitting up till four or five in the
morning. Don't I do ye a prodigious piece of Service? Par Who me? Ay a damnable
one


Thus I always oblige Friends.


You do well.


But perhaps I detain ye Sir; your business possibly calls ye elsewhere?


No I Am at my Journey's end.


Pray Sir, do me the favor then to introduce me to the Lady.


Very good! This present will be your Pasport now.


Will ye be pleased to have any one sent out to ye?





What here still my nown Friend? Do You keep guard here that not an Embassy by a
Civil Messenger can pass privately between the Captain and the Lady?


Pireo, when he is upon Duty there. -- There Is somewhat more than ordinary in
the wind; -- And he is in great haste too -- I cannot guess what makes him throw
his Eyes about thus


incognito where'ere she be. -- The most charming Look! From this Moment, I Have
done with the whole Sex be^ides. Your Every-day Las^es and Faces will never
down again


Heyday! Here Is another in the whining and languishing Vein, or I Am beside the
Cushion -- The old Gentleman their Father's finely blessed? If this Spark once
begins the Sport, he will be so mad upon it, that Mr. Phedrie will be a Child to
him


Would the De'el had this old Mumsimus for stopping my Journey: And me too for
staying, when I should have taken no notice of him. -- Ho! here is Parmeno! Well
met old Friend


Why so concerned, and yet so Gay? And whether a going?


Who I? Troth I cannot tell whence I came, nor where I Am going, I Have lost my
Senses


How so I beseech ye?


I Am in Love man.


Heyday.


Now old Boy, show what a Man your are: thou know how often thou have
promised me: Master Cherea, do but find out one you ve a mind to, and I Will show
what a Talent I have at Intriguing: You remember it was when I use to get you
many a good bit out of my Fathers Pantry, and no body e're the wiser, ye Rogue


Pshaw no more of that.


Why, Faith ^twas even so: Therefore prithee now be as good as thy word, at
least if you think it worth beating your Brains about. -- This pretty Creature
is not at all like our Town Ladies, whose Mothers saddle their backs, and
strait-lace their Wastes to make em well shap^d. If any chance to grow a little
plumper than the rest, they presently cry, She Is an Hostess; and then her
Allowance must be shortened, and tho she be nat^^aly fat and lusty, yet by her
dieting she is made as slender as a B^^omstick: By this means one Woodcock or
another is caught in their Spring


And how is yours I beseech ye?


Such a Beauty, the World never saw.


Hey-day!


Her Complexion true and natural; Her Body sound and strong, and as plump as a
Partridge


How old think ye? Che. About Sixteen.


In the very prime I faith.


Now, do you but help me to this sweet Creature, either by force, fraud, or
wheedle, I don't care which way, so I do but enjoy her


But what is this sweet Creature?


Faith I know not.


Whence came she?


I cannot tell.


Where does she live?


Nor that neither.


Where did you see her^


In the Street here.


How came you to lose her?


That Is it I was cursing at, when I met you Nor do I think there is that Man
living, whose good Fortune had left him thus in the lurch. What a Misfortune
was here! -- I Am a very Wretch


What Is done to ye Sir?


De^s ask? Don't ye know old Archidemides, my Father's Kinsman and Companion?


Yes, very well.


This Fellow met me full butt, as I was hot upo' the Scent after this pretty
Creature


Faith 'twas a little unseasonable.


Rather devilish unfortunare: for lighte^ Matters may be called unseasonable
For I can safel^ swear, I had not seen him this half Year till now, when I
neither desired nor wanted his Company. V^asn't this a damned Accident? Hah!
what say you


As you say, Sir, 'twas a damned Accident.


He comes hobbling after me as far as he could see me, with his Chin and his
Knees together; his Joints shaking in his Hide; hanging his Jib like an old
Horse, and groaning like a rotten Sheep; He bawls out, Soho, Cherea, Soho! it is
you I would speak with. -- With that I made a halt. De'e know, says he, what is
my Business with ye? No, pray tell me Sir. Oh, said he, my Cause comes on to
morrow. And what then, said I? Why be sure (quoth he) to tell your Father, that
he must not fail to be at th'Court. I think he was a whole hour by the Clock in
telling this. I asked him if he had any further Business, he said None at all.
Away march I: And looking for this young Creature, I found she had taken down
this Street


My Life on it, if this ben't the same that was presented to Thais.


As soon as I was got hither she was vanished.


Had she any Attendance with her?


Yes a Man and a Waiting-maid.





Sure thy Wits are a Wool-gathering.


No, I know what I say.


Why, can tell who she is? -- Prithee ^ell me. -- Did ye see her?


I did see her, I know her too, (more than that) I can tell where she is gone
too


Ah dear Rogue! Do know her indeed?


Yes, Sir.


And can^st tell where she is gone too?


She was brought hither as as a Present to ^^a^s.


Is any Man living able to be at the Charge ^^ such a Present?


Yes, Captain Thraso, your Brother's Ri^^^.


For ought I see my Brother will be put to his last Trumps then.


Ay Faith! so you would swear indeed, if you knew what a precious Present he has
provided to match this withal


What Is that prithee.


An Eunuch.


What that Tool of a Man that he bought yesterday? That haggish Fellow?


That Is he Sir.


Certainly he and his present will be kicked to the Devil. -- But I never knew
before that this Thais was our Neighbor


Why she is lately removd hither.


Unlucky Whelp that I am! That I should never see her. -- But prithee tell me
is she such a Beauty as they talk of? Par. Every Jot


But short of our's my Life on it.


Quite another thing.


Prithee honest Boy, do but thy best to bring us both together.


You shall have my good will in it. I Will do what I can to help ye: What would he
have more


Whither away now?


Why home to hand the Presents hither according to your Brothers Orders.


Oh the Luck of this same roguy Eunuch, to go into this House upon such an
Errand


Why so Sir?


De^e ask that? Why he will always be blessed with the sight of his beautiful
Companion; they li talk together, live together, and now and then perhaps lie
together


What would you say now, if you were that blessed Creature?


Which way? Speak dear Rogue.


Suppose you take his Clothes, --


His Clothes? And how then?


And be carried thither instead of him, --


On, on Boy.


And give out that you are he.


I small your design.


And there you may enjoy all those rare Blessings you fancied but just now for
another. You may eat and drink with her, sit by her, touch, ^^y with her, and
-- lie by her. For not a Creat^re in that House can tell what you are, or
whence you came. And besides, your Age and those Smooth chops of yours will
make you pass ^^r a Complete Eunuch


Spoken like an Angel! and advised like an Oracle! -- ^hugs Parmeno, and is
carrying him off.] Come away Boy, let us in and about it, equip me to ^^ghts
now, immediately away with m^, and bring me to her as fast as you can for your
Life





'Pshaw! That Is Nonsense.


I Am ruin^d! How like a Fool have I done! where do you thrust me Sir? -- Faith
you had almost ^usht me on my Nose -- It Is you I speak to Sir. Pray stay


But I say let us go.


Are ye resolved upon it then?


Absolutely.


Have a ca^e you don't make more haste (...) good speed.


No, no, let me alone for that.


A^ but my Bones will smart for it. Oh! (...) horrible Villainy!


A Villainy do you call it for a Man to go into a ^^dy-House; and a pay a Company
of silts in their ^n Coin? why if they make a Trade to abuse, torment and
trepan innocent young Men, is it not Justice and Equity to plague and chouse
them again? -- Shall Not I rather play Tricks with them, than with my Father? This
I should be blamed f^r; as for the other, 'twould be said, I served them in their
own kind


How Is this! Well! if ye be fully bent (...) on it, even take your own course;
but then (...) lay the blame at m^ door afterward


I will not then.


And is it your will to have it so?


It Is my will to have it so, and it must (...) so, and it shall be so; and what
I have said I w^^ stand by


Nay then follow me.


Venus and Cupid favor the Design.


WELL, but was she so very thankf^l then?


O yes Sir, most hugely.


And glad at Heart say ye?


O yes, but not so much for the Gift as the Giver: and for that let me tell ye
she is plaguil^. proud on it


Bellswagger. Retires to one side.


Really I have the luck on it; every thing that I do is most wonderfully taking.


I have observed as much.


The King of Persia, whenever I did him a kindness, was always very sensible of
it: He was not so to every body


A smart Tongue so well hung as yours, makes all that Glory his own, which
others so long have toiled for


Right Boy!


The King has you in his Eye then?


Right again.


And loves to have you there.


No doubt on it. -- Nay more he trusted his whole Army to my Conduct, and
follows my Advice in every thing


Prodigious!


Then if he chanced to be weary of Comp^ny or Business, and had a Mind to take
a little ease -- as the -- you know what I mean


Yes, Sir, As though when he had a mind to clear his Stomach, as a body may so
say, of all Concerns, --


Right, then would he take me to him Hand to First.


Ay marry Sir! this is a King indeed.


Oh! He Is a man of a Thousand. --


Yes, one of a million -- if he choose you for his Companion.


All the Officers envied me, and grumbl'd at me behind my back: I didn't value
it a Straw; they envied me damnably. But above all, one who had the Charge of
the Indian Elephants. This Fellow being more troublesome than the rest, Prithee
Strato, said I, why so plaguey Big? Is it because you are Lord over a parcel of
Beasts


Neatly said, in faith, and shrewdly. -- Bless me! You overthrew Man and Beast
-- What said he, Sir


Not a word.


Nay I don't know how he should.


Bless me! This Captain's the blindest Coxcomb, and the other the vilest Rascal
I ever saw.


What think ye Gnatho? Did I ever tell ye how sharp I was upon the young
Rhodian Spark at a Feast


Never, Sir, let us hear it, I pray, -- He has told it me a thousand times.


This Rhodian Spark I told ye of, was with me at a Feast, where by chance I had
a small Girl; this Strippling began to be sweet upon her, an^ waggish upon me
too. How now you impudent Saucebox, (said I) you're Man's meat your self, and
yet have a mind to a Tit-bit


Ha, ha, he.


What Is the matter? Hah!


Very fine, sharp and delicate; that could not be mended. -- But pray, Sir, was
this a^l your own? I took it for an old one


Why did you ever hear't before?


Yes, Sir, very often: And it takes extremely. --


I Will affure you, 'twas all my own.


I am sorry you were so sharp upon the foolish young Gentleman.


Ah the De'el take thee for a Rascal.


Pray, Sir, what did he say then?


He was quite dashed out of Countenance; And the whole Company was ready to die
with Laughing. After that every body was plaguey wary of meddling with me


And well they might.


-- But hark ye, Gnatho, had I best clear my self to Thais from the jealousy
she has of my being in love with Pamphila


Let that be the least of your Thoughts; but rather give her more cause to be
jealous


Why so?


That Is a Question: Don't ye apprehend me Sir? Should she but speak a word of
Phedrie, or offer to commend him on purpose to plague you. --


That.


Your only way to prevent that, is, whenever she names Phedrie, be sure you hit
her in the Teeth with Pamphila; if she cries, let us have Phedrie to be merry
with us, do you answer, And Pamphila to give us a Song: If she praise his
shape, extol her Face: And be sure give her a Rowland for her Oliver, and that
will vex her to the Heart --


Ay, if she loved me, this might do, Gnatho.


As long as she desires and loves your Presents, you may lay your Life she
loves you. So (...) you may venture to teaze her; she will always (...) lest any
angry word should turn the (...) of your Bounty another way


Thou say right. -- Why I never so much as dreamed of this before.


A good Jest in faith: Sure you didn't give your Mind to it; for had you set your
Wits about it, your Contrivance would have been worth fifty of min


I fancied I heard the Captain's Tongue just now. -- Oh, here he as -- My dear
Hero, welcome.


Oh, my sweet Thais, my dear Honey, how, is it. -- Don't ye love me now, for
giving you this pretty Wench


Admirable in faith! how nobly he opens the Campaign.


Oh, Sir, I Am eternally obliged to you for it.


Let Us in to Supper I say: why this dallying?


Here Is another too! Faith one would swear he is the Captain's Bastard, they are
so like one another.








Parmeno, troth you are co^^ very lucky, I was just a going out.


Whither Madam?


Why don't ye see this Gentleman here.


I do see him, with a pox, to my sorrow. -- When you please Madam, my Master's
Presents a^^ at your Service.


What do we^stay for? why don't we ^^^ on?





Special Presents! I Will warrant ye not to ^^ named the same day with mine.


The Trial's all -- Prester John's Country.


I can have as good for Seven or Eight Guineas.


Ay and a better too.


Doras where are ye? stand forth Boy. -- Here Is your Eunuch for ye then -- see
what a pert look he has got, and ^ast in the prime of his Age.


As I hope to be saved a very tight Fellow.


What say ye now Mr. Gnatho: Do You spy any Faults here? -- And you noble
Captain? -- what never a word? -- That Is Commendation enough of all Conscience.
-- Try him in the Schools, Field, Music, or where you will, you ll find he has
had the Education of a Gentleman


For a need that Eunuch would down well enough, tho a man was sober.


And yet Madam, the Gentleman that made these Presents, dosn't desire to be
your only Favorite, nor that all others should be thrust out of doors for his
sake: He dosn't tell your Romantic Stories of his Fights and Duels, nor yet
boast of his Wounds and Scars; neither does he stand in your Light, as a
certain person that shall be nameless. But when it shall be no trouble to you
Madam, when you please, and your Ladyship is at leisure,he thinks it favor
enough to be then admitted


It Is Evident this Fellow has got some poor Grubstrect Merchant for his Master.


Faith like enough; for he would not keep this Fellow so long, had he a Shilling
in his Pocket to hire him a better


Peace Dog. -- Thou art not worthy to ^e kicked -- If you can stoop to flatter
him,


Shall we stay to hear this Fellow prate?


I Will only just step in with these, and order my Maids what to do; and I Will be
back again in an instant.


I ll go before -- B^t do you stay and wait upon my Mistress.


Fie! it is beneath a General to Squire his own Mistress.


Like Master like Man.


Ha, ha, he. --


What do you laugh at?


Why what you just now said: Besides you put me in mind of the Rhodian Spark,
and I could not forbear -- but here is Madam Tha^^ again

Re-enter Thais, Pythia and Attendants.


Run home and see that all the Rooms ^o ready.


I Am gone Sir.


Pythia take care to do what I bid ye -- if Mr. Chremes should chance to come
to day, desire him to stay a little; if he is in haste, beg him to come another
time; if he cannot do that, send him over to the Captains to me


I will Madam.


Hold -- I had something else to say. -- Let me see, -- O I remember't -- Be
sure you make much of the young Gentlewoman. Do you keep home.


Now let us march.


Do you follow me.


In troth the more I think and chew upon this business, the more I Am afraid
that this Thais should play me some plaguey Dog-trick or other; I find my self
damnably wheadl d by her. When she first sent for me,any man might have
wondered what business I had there; Faith I could not tell my self: but when I
came, she immediately casts about for Fetches and Excuses to make me tarry. I
have, (says she) just now been at my Devotion, therefore more fit to discourse
of grave and serious Matters. At that my Heart misgave me plaguily. She drew a
Chair and sat down by me, and fawning upon me, she began to pump for discourse.
When she had nothing else to say, she would fall a asking me, How long my Father
and Mother had been dead? I told her, a pretty while since: Then, whether I had
not a Seat at Sunio, and how far it stood off the Sea. Pox! I believe she liked
the Situation her self, and had a mind to gull me out on it. And lastly, If I
had not lost a young Sister thence? and who was with her then? What she had
about her whenlost? Whether 'twas possible for one to know her again? And such
like Stuff. I cannot imagine why the De'el she asked all these Questions;
without she designs to put her self upon me instead of this lost Sister; as it
is the ^mpudence of these Jades. However if she is alive, (...) is just Sixteen
and no more: but this same Thais is somewhat older than my self -- She has sent
again to beg of me very earuestly to come. -- ^ow let her tell her business
plainl, or trouble me o more. I ll be hanged if she catch me here a third ^ime.
So ho! within there! soho! knocks at the Door


within Who is there?


It Is I, my Names Chreme^

(...) prett^ little Squire is it you?


So -- I said as much, this wheadling bode^ (...) good


M Lady humbly desires you to come again to morr^^.


I Am to go into the Country.


For love's sake Sir, do.


I tell you plainly I cannot.


Why then, Sir, stay but a little till my Lady comes bac^.


Faith I don't intend it.


Why not, dear Mr Chremcs.


Pox take ye for a dissembling Baggage.


Well if you be resolved, I beseech ye Sir, to give your self the trouble of
stepping over to her where she is


I don't care if I do that.


Doria!


Yesterday a Knot of good Fellows of us were got together at Pireo, where we
clubb d to have a Feast to d^y. We chose Cherea for our Steward. The Forfeits
were all laid down, and time and place agreed upon. The time's past, and at the
place they know nothing on it; our Gentleman Steward has given us the ^^ip, and
Faith I cannot tell what to say, or think of the Business. -- The rest of the
Company have employed me to hunt about for him; I think I d as good call in at
his Father's -- Thais's House? is it he, or is it not he? -- As I live it is he
-- He day! what a Toy of a man have we got here? -- What means thi^ disguise?
-- what unaccountable freak is this? I am puzzled, and cant imagine for my Heart
what is the matter? whatsoever it be I will know before I stir a foot.


is there never a curious inquisitive Fellow following me close upon the Heel,
to deafen and murder me with Question upon Question at every turn? As, Why so
transported? Why so wonderful merry? Whither away so fast? Whence came ye?
Where got ye this Garb? What Frolick's this? Are ye in your Wits? or are ye
stark mad


Cherea, what is it you chuckle at so? what means this fool's Coat? why so merry
about the Mouth? Hey brave! what do you mean? Do You pretend to be in your wits?
what do you stare for? --


Huzzah! This is a day of Jubilee! well met old Soul! Gad take me, there is not
a Man alive I Would have wished for so soon as thy dear self


Prithee tell me this mighty business.


And prithee dear Rogue prepare thy self to receive it then. -- I suppose you
know my Brother's Mistress


Yes, you mean Thais I suppose.


The very same


I thought I knew her.


This day a pretty young Female was presented to her. But why should I stand
prating, and commending her charming Face to thee my Friend, when thou know
so well what a Critic I am in Beauties? -- In short she fired my Blood


Say you so?


Ay Boy, had you but seen her, I Am sure you would say she was the Miracle of her
Sex. But to leave impertinencies, I was presently in up to the Ears; And as
good luck would have it, we had an Eunuch at home, which my Brother bought for
his Mistress, but was not yet delivered to her. Our Man Parmeno gave me an Item
of a Design, which I immediately put in Execution


And what was that?


Be patient and you will hear't the sooner. It was to change Clothes with the
Eunuch, and for me to be presented instead of him


What for the Eunuch?


Even so old Boy.


Prithee what advantage could you propose to your self by that?


That Is worth the asking indeed, why to see her, discourse with her, and be
alone with the pretty Creature I loved (ye Rogue.) And do you make nothing of
this now? -- In short presented I was to Thais, who as soon as she received me,
very joyfully brought me home; and committed the Beautiful Creature to my
charge


To whose Charge? to thine?


Yes, to mine.


Marry, she was in safe Hands!


She ordered that not a Man should com^ nigh her but my self, and charged me
not to stir a step from her; and that She and I should be alone together in the
Parlour. I looked as if Butter would not melt in my Mouth, and cried, Yes Madam


The Lord help thee.


She told me she was going out to Supper; And with that drew all her Train
after her, except a few raw new comers to attend the fair Stranger. Those
prepared a Bath for my Angel: I urged 'em to hasten't as much as they could.
Whilst they were about it, this sweet Creature was sitting in a Withdrawing
Room, casting her Eyes upon a fair Piece, which was the picture of Jupiter, who
(as the story goes) came down into Danae's Lap in a Shower of Gold. I made bold
to dart a Look that way too, and finding how like the Intrigue was to mine, I
could not but be^ten times the more tickled at the Conceit on it. That a very God
should transform himself into a Mortal, and privately steal through the Tyles
of another Man's House, and so drop like a Shower into his Mistresses Arms. But
what God, thought I, was this? Why no less a God than the Thunderer himself,
who shakes the Battlements of Heaven. And should Flesh and Blood refuse to
follow his Example? I Will do it, and with all my Soul too. While these thoughts
were working in my Head, they called her away to the Bath, she goes, she
washes, she comes back: And then they put her to Bed, I stood waiting for the
word of Command. At last comes one to me, Prithee do you Dorus take this Fan,
and cool the young Gentlewoman thus, the time we are Bathing. When we have
done, you may bath if you have a mind to it


I Would a given the whole almost to have seen that impudent Face of thine at that
time; how you carried your self; and how like a great Booby you managed the Fan


The words were scarce out of her Mouth, but the^ all rushed out of the Room to
the Bath, and set up a Gaggle, as Servants do when their Master's Back's
turned. Mean time my dear Lady falls into a sweet sleep; with that I cunningly
casts a Sheep's E^e askiew through the Fan,


What then brave Boy?


How? what then? Simpleton!


A Simpleton indeed!


Should I have neglected such a short, wished for, and unexpected Opportunity,
when it dropped into my very Mouth. I must have been a very Eunuch indeed then


Faith Boy, you are in the right. -- But in the mean time what is become of our
Treat


It Is just ready.


Troth, thou 'rt a brave Fellow. But where is it? At your House.


No; at old Harry Platters.


That Is plaguey way off.


We must go the faster then, that is all.


But will not you change your Clothes.


How can I? Pox on it! I Am quite banished home, for fear my Brother should see
me, and what is worse, lest my old Father should become out of the Country


Why then even let us go to our House; that is the nighest place I can think of,
to shift your self


That Is right; let us away then and lay our Heads together, how my Dear may be
for ever mine


A Match then.


AS I Am a living Soul, as much as I can gather from the Captain's humor, I Am
terribly af^aid this Swaggerer should make some disturbance to day, and fall
foul upon my Lad^. For as soon as young Chremes, the Gentlewoman's Brother came
thither, she asked leave of the Captain to have him admitted. He began to huff
and be angry, but yet durst not deny her. Besides, my Lady urged him to desire
the Gentleman to sit down and welcome, because she would have him stay there, for
this was not a proper time to tell him all she had a mind to about his Sister.
At last with a dogged Look, he coldly bids him welcome. The Gentleman staid, and
my Lady began to discourse. This Captain Huff-cap imagining he had been a Rival
brought under his Nose to affront him, thought he would do something that
should plague her too. Hark ye, says he, go for Pamphila, to give us a Song. By
no means in the World, cries my Lady; What should such a Wench do at a Feast?
The Captain being set upon it fell to wrangling. Mean time the cunning Creature
whips her Gold and Jewels into this Casket, and slipped it into my Hand to carry
off; which is a certain sign she will not be long behind, as soon as she can get
away


As I was walking to our Country House upon the Road, (as it is usual with
people when they are uneasy) a thousand thoughts came running into my Head one
after another, which I took all in the worst Sense: To be short, whilst I was
musing upon these things, I passed by my House unawares, and had got half a
Mile before I perceived it; upon that I turned back with a Heart as heavy as
Lead. -- When I was just got by the way to the House, I stood still, and began
to think thus with my self: What? must I be forced to stay here eight and forty
long hours without her? -- What of all that? -- A mere trifle! -- How a trifle?
-- What if I cannot kiss her Hand, yet it is very hard if I cannot have one look
at her? If I cannot have the one, sure I may have the other: It Is better to be
almost distanc'd, than to be quite thrown out of the Race. With that I went by
on purpose. -- But hold, what makes Pythia run out of Doors in such a fright





Alas! my Heart misgives me strangely.





How Is this?





I cannot imagine what great disorder here has been in my absence -- I Will even
step to her

Pythia?


Hah, Mr Phedrie! Whom look for say ye? a Curse upon you and your precious
Presents both together


Prithee tell me what is the matter?


The Matter, quoth I? -- Your Eunuch that you gave us, what wicked Work has he
made here? He has gone and ravished the young Gentlewoman the Captain gave my
Lady





I Am quite undone.


Ay and drunk too, I think.


Would the worst of mine Enemies were as drunk as I am.


O Law, Pythia, was not it a very prodigious thing, ha!


You Are certainly mad. -- How is it possible for an Eunuch to do this?


I cannot tell what he was; but what he has done, it is plain. The poor young
Creature is all in Tears, neither can ye get one Word from her. This precious
Rogue hides his Head now. I Am woefully afraid he has fingered somewhat out of the
House too, when he ran away


It Is a wonder to me such a Limber-hamm'd Dog should get out of sight so soon,
unless he has ho^s'd himself at my Father's


Dear Sir, step in and see.


You shall know that presently.


O Gemini! Prithee my Dear, did you ever hear of such a horrid Prank before? I
never did


Truly I have heard say, these Eunuchs are great Admirers of fine Women, but
can do nothing but slabber them over. But I, like a silly Jade as I was, never
thought of this: If I had, I should have locked up my Gentleman, and have kept
the Girl far enough from his reach


Come out ye infamous Dog! -- What do you hang an Arse ye Runagate Scoundrel! --
Thou damnable Bargain out of your Kennel


Good Sir.


Do but see what a damned Friday-face the J^il-bird makes? How came you hither
again? -- Why this change of Habit I pray? -- What answer Dog? -- Had I staid
but a minute longer, Pythia, I had miss does Rogue, you see hes just equipt for
the March


O dear Sir, have ye met with the Rascal?


Met with him? Ay.


That Is good Luck indeed.


Ay special good Luck upo' my word:


What ha ye done with him?


Done with him? Cannot ye see before ye?


Whom should I see?


This Fellow here.


What of this Fellow here?


The same that was sent to your House to day.


I dare swear Sir, none of our House e're set eye upon him.


Sure they were blind then.


Pray Sir, can ye believe this to be the Man that was brought to our ^ouse?


Believe't? The De'el (...) else had I to send.


Fie! -- there is no Comparison to be made between this and that; for that other
had a fine Air, and looked like a Gentleman


Ay, so you thought, because he had got his gay Clothes on: now he has altered
his Habit, you take him for an ugly Creature


Pray Sir, don't persuade me to it, as if there were no more difference than
that comes to. Why he that we had to day was such a fine young Fellow, 'twould
have done your Heart good to have seen him. This is a dry, decrepit,
drowzy-headed Fumbler, and looks like a Weezle


'Sdeath! What stuff's this? -- You Have brought me to that pass, that for my
part I know not what I Have done my self. -- Come hither Sirrah,


Yes, an't please you.


Now pray Sir, let me have one pull at him.


Do so.


Were you at our House to day? Parmen) brought was but sixteen.


Well I Will at him once again my self. First, tell me how you came by these
Clothes? What have you lost you Tongue? -- Ye ugly Dog, why don't ye answer me?


One Mr Cherea came. --


Not my Brother I hope?


Yes Sir?


When?


To day.


How long ago?


But a little while.


Who did he come with?


Parmeno, an't please you.


Did you know him before?


No Sir, nor ever heard of his name.


How came ye then to know 'twas my Brother?


Parmeno told me so. -- And 'twas Cherea gave me these Clothes --


Confusion!


-- And put on mine, and away they went together.





Away ye Beast, -- Do You believe one word this Fellow prates?


A Fig for believing! The thing's plain enough of it self.


Cherea take your Clothes from ye?


He did Sir,


And put 'em on himself?


Yes Sir.


And was sent hither in your stead.


Yes, that he was.


Oh Heavens! This is the most wicked impudent Dog living.


Alas Sir! Are ye not convinced that we have been most basely abused?


No wonder if a cracked Chambermaid believes this Scoundrel: Cherea?


No indeed, Sir.


I see there is nothing to be done without blows. -- This way ye Dog -- He hunts
Counter. -- Down of your Knees, and ask me pardon







Into your Kennel then.


Hey, hey.


Faith I could not tell how to make a fair come off without this Stratagem. If
so, the thing's past cure.


My Life on it, this damned plot is of Parmeno's contriving.


You may swear it.


In Faith I Will pay him in his own Coin before I sleep. -- But prithee Doria,
what would advise me in the Case


You mean in the young Gentlewoman's Business?


Yes, whether we had best keep it to our selves, or tell on it.


In tr^th, if you're wise, take no notice of the Eunuch, or the Girl either:
for by that means you will keep out of harms way, and oblige our Lady besides.
You need only say the Eunuch has given us the slip


I Will follow your Counsel.


But yonder comes Mr. Chremes; -- My Lady is not far behind then


What makes ye think so?


Because the Captain and she were almost at Daggers drawing when I left em.


Then away with the Casket quick: -- I Will learn of this Gentleman what is to do.





Oh Mr. Chremes!


Who Is that? -- Oh, the pretty, pretty, Phythie! Why thou art worth forty of
the Phythies I saw last


And upo' my Word you're forty times more pleasant than you were before.


The old Saying's very true, If twasn't for Meat and good Drink the Women might
gnaw the Sheets. -- But your Mistress has been come home a long time I suppose


Why is she come from the Captain's then?


Oh a damnable while -- They were quarrelling like Dog and Cat.


Didn't she desire ye to follow her?


No, she only tipp'd a Wink at me as she went away.


And was not that Item enough?


No Faith: I could not tell what her winking and twinking meant till the Captain
very civilly gave me to understand it by thrusting me Head and Shoulders after
her. -- But see she is upo' the Back on's already. -- I wonder what Devil
brought me hither before her.





Ah Madam, I Have been here a long while.


My dear Chremes! 'twas you I wanted; Arn't you sensible this Quarrel was upo'
your account? And the whole business a concern of yours


Of mine? Pray how so? As if I had been --


Whilst I Am taking pains to help you to your Sister, and restore her to ye, I Am
forced to sit down with these and a thousand such like Affronts


Pray Madam, where is she now?


At home at my House.


Hah!


What Is the Matter? you needn't fear; for her education hasn't been beneath her
self, or you either


What Is that you say?


Nothing but the truth. I freely give her to ye, and shant expect a Farthing
for my pains


I thank ye Madam, and shall endeavor to make ye amends when time serves.


But have a care Sir, you don't lose her before you have her, for it is she the
Captain is coming to plunder us of by force of Arms. -- Do You hear, Pythia, run
n and fetch the Casket and To^ens quick





Where is it set, Madam?


In the Chest of Drawers. -- Do You move no faster ye Baggage?


What an Army has this Fellow mustered up against ye? -- Lamentable!


What Cow-hearted my Dear?


Pshaw, I Cow-hearted? I Am as bold as a Lion.


Ay, and so you had need.


Ah Madam, I doubt ye take me for ^a -- strange Fellow.


However take this for your comfort, this Fellow you're to deal with is a
perfect Stranger, has less Interest, less Acquaintance, and fewer Friends to
back him than you


That I know too: But 'tisn't for a wise Man to stand behind an Ass when he
kicks. I Would rather prevent a Quarrel before hand, than revenge it afterward. --
Do you run in and Barricade the Door, whilst I run to the Piazza, and fetch the
Constable to keep the Peace.





I had better go.


Stand your ground pray.


Pray let me go, I Will be back again in an instant.


Sir, you need not call any help -- do but tell him she is your Sister, and
that you lost her when she was young, and are now come to the knowledge of her,
then show him the Tokens




Here they are Madam.


Do you take 'em Sir. --


Yes very well


Be sure you speak this with a good Cou^age.


Edad, and so I will.


Up with your Cloak Man -- Dear Heart I Have pitched upon a Champion that wants
one himself.




Prithee Gnatho; Is It for a Man of Honor to put up such a notorious Affront as
this? I Will dye upo' the spot first. -- Simalio, Donax, Syriscus, follow your
Leader. -- First I Will storm their Castle


Very well.


Then I Will carry off the Damsel triumphantly.


Better and better.


And lastly, I Will put the Jilt under severe Contributions.


Best of all.


Advance Donax with your Truncheon, and Command the main Body. -- Simalio
Command you the Left Wing, and you Syriscus the Right. -- Where are the rest?
Where Is Captain Sanga with his Ragged Regiment


Here Sir.





Who I, Sir? Why I knew the Prowess of my General, and the Carriage of his
Soldiers so well, that they could never part without Blood and Wounds, so I
brought this to wipe 'em withal


Where Is all the rest of 'em?


The rest, with a vengeance? There Is only Sannio left to keep the House from
running away


Gnatho do you set 'em all in Rank and File. -- I Will bring up the Rear, and
there give the Signal for the Onset


This it is to be Wise: When he has drawn ^p his Men in Battalia, he will make
sure of one ^Post for his own retreat.


This was always the F -- K -- 's way.




Do You observe, Madam, what this Cutthroat's about? I see my Counsel was not
amiss when I advised ye to Barricade the Door


Pshaw! This Fellow that you take for a Hector, is as Faint-hearted as a Town
Bully. -- Bear up Man





Had we but a Mortar now to play upon 'em under the Covert way; one Bomb would
make 'em scamper





Shall we give the Assault, noble General?


Hold I say. -- Wise Commanders usually send a Summons before they Storm:
Perhaps she will surrender upon Discretion before we make the Assault


Oh wonderful! What plaguey things these Politics are? I never am in your
company, but I go away the wiser for it


Thais answer me the first Article, when I gave ye Pamphila, didn't ye promise
me so many days to my self


What of all that?


That Is a pretty Question! -- Didn't ye bring one of your Gallants under my
Nose? What business had ye together? Why did you slink away with him from my
House


Cause 'twas my Pleasure.


Why then deliver up Pamphila, unless you would have her carried off by force.


Deliver her to thee? Touch her if you ^a^e: Thou worst of --





Do you prate, Buffoon.


Shall Not I touch what is my own?


Thine, Villain?











I Will crack your Fools Pate for ye, if ye ben't gone presently.


Say you so, Mr. Snarle? Are your Hands so heavy?





That ye shall know presently: First, I say s^e's Freeborn.


So!


And a Citizen of Athens.


How!


And my Sister too.


Oh Impudence.


Therefore Captain, Sopl^ona, the Nurse, and show her the Tokens.


Why will you, Sir, hinder me from meddling with what is my own?


Yes, that I will.


Chremes own (...) himself a Thief, he has done his own business.





Go look.


What shall we do next?


E'n let us march home again -- By and by she will come fawning like a Spaniel to
beg your Pardon


Think ye so?


Nothing more certain, I know the humor of these women well enough; when you
will, they will not, and when you will not, they will


Thou have hit it.


Shall I dismiss the Army?


When you will.





Troth my belly chym'd Cupboard above half an hour ago.


Well said Tom Prog. --


Follow your Leader.


I do know, I don't know, he is fled, I heard on it, but was not there. Hussy,
cannot ye tell me in plain terms whatever the Matter is. The poor Girl's Gown's
rent, she is all in Tears, and will not speak. The Eunuch's fled too; But why? --
What Is done? -- What no answer? --


Alas, Madam, What would ye have me say? when they all affirm 'twasn't a Eunuch
that was here


Who was it then^


One Mr. Cherea.


What Mr. Cherea?


The young Gentleman, Phedrie's Brother.


What Is that ye say ye VVitch?


Nothing but what is certainly true.


Pray what should he do here? Upon what account came he hither, pray?


I cannot guess, unless he was in Love with Pamphila.


'S death, I Am undone then, all my Measures are broken if this be true. Is^t
for this the poor Creature bemoans her self so


So I believe, Madam.


How Is this ye Baggage? Didn't I give you a particular Charge about her, when I
went away


What could I do in the Case? You ordered that she should be wholly committed
to his care


Oh you Jade, you set the Wolf to ^eep the Sheep: I Am ashamed to the Soul to
be so cursedly fool^d. --


^S't, Madam! Patience I beseech ye: All Is well, we have got our Spark in Lob's
pound


Where is he?


'S't! on the Left Hand; Don't you see him? -- look there then.


I see him.


Seize him immediately.


What can we do to him, Fool!


Do to him, say ye? -- See, I beseech you, what a cursed impudent Look he has
got, --


I see no such thing.


And with what Confidence he comes to us.


Antipho's Father and Mother were both at home, as if they would staid there on
purpose, that I could not possibly g^t in without being discovered. The time I
was i^ the Porch, an Acquaintance o'mine came that way. Upon this, I takes me
to my heels as fast as I could, runs into a blind Alley, then to another, and
so to a third. Thus did I dance up and down in a Peck of Troubles to prevent a
discovery. -- But hold, is that Thais? The very same. -- I Am at a plaguey stand
what to do. -- Pshaw, what care I? She can neither hang, draw, nor quarter


Let Us up to him. -- O good Sir Dorus, you're welcome home. -- Pray tell me,
Did you run away from us


True as you say, Madam.


And are extremely pleased with this vagary I warrant?


Not so extremely neither Madam.


Do You think you shall come off so?


Well Madam, pardon me this one Fault, if you catch me in another hang me up.


Were you afraid that I should prove a harsh Mistress, that you ran for it?


No indeed Madam.


Of what then?


Why I was only afraid this woman should ha told Tales of me.


Why what have you done then?


A small matter.


Impudence! A small matter do you call it? -- Is ravishing a Virgin and a Citizen
so small a Matter in your account?


I took her for one of my fellow Servants.


Thy fellow Servant? I can scarce keep my Nails out of the Eyes of him. -- Thou
Devil incarnate! Are you come to laugh at us too?





Why Madam? As if there could have been any thing done to me, if I had pulled
his Locks for him, since he owns himself your Servant


Triffling aside, -- Indeed, Mr. Cherea, you ve done a very unworthy thing, and
which did not become ye, for tho I had deserved this Affront never so much, yet
'twas dishonorable for you to do it. As I live, I know not what course to take
about the poor Girl. You Have so broken all my Measures, that I cannot possibly
return her to her Friends, neither as I ought to do, nor as I intended: that I
might ingratiate my self among 'em by so complete an Obligation


Now, Madam, I hope to see a lasting kindness betwixt us both. For from such
bad Beginnings as this often the greatest Friendships rise. And who knows but
some lucky Star has ordered this


Why truly I interpret it thus, and wish it from my Soul.


And I beg it might be so. Believe this one thing, 'twasn't to affront you, but
pure love caused all this


I do believe it, and therefore rather pa^don it: For I Am not of that Nature,
Mr. Cherea, nor yet so insensible my self as not to know some what of the Power
of Love


As I hope for Happiness, Madam, I Am extremely taken with you.


Faith, Madam, look to your self then.


I would not hurt her if I might.


I Will trust ye no farther than I can see ye.


Leave prating, Fool.


Now, Madam, I must crave your Assistance in this great Design. I trust and
commit my self wholly to your disposal, and beg your Protection. Let me die, if
I don't marry her


But what if your Father? --


What he? -- I Am sure of his Consent, could she be proved to be a Gentlewoman.


If you please to stay a little her Brother will be here strait: He Is but stepped
for the Nurse that brought her up. And so Sir you may be by at the Discovery


Then I Will stay.


I think we'd better go in in the mean time than stay at the Door.


With all my Heart.


Do You know Madam whatyou're going to do?


Why that Question?


Why? Sure you don't intend to take this Blade into your House again.


Why not?


Trust me for once Madam, he will make some new Disturbance.


Prithee leave your tattling.


It seems you have not made sufficient trial of him then.


I Will do no harm good Mrs Pythia.


I Will not trust ye an Ace good Mr. Cherea. -- ^anless your Head were off.


But Mrs. Pythia thou shall be my Keeper.


No Faith, who will trust their selves with you, either to keep or be kept by
ye? Away with ye. --




What luck's here, here is the Brother just upon us.


Alas-a-day! I beseech ye Madam, let us in. I would not for the world be seen
in the Street in this Dress


Why so? 'Cause you're ashamed on it?


Yes indeed am I.


Yes indeed am I, say ye? For the young Woman Cherea!


Do you go in, Sir, I Will follow ye. --

Pythia to bring in Mr. Chremes.


Parmeno pay Sauce for this damnable Cheat, he has put upon us?


Come, bestir your self Nurse a little faster.


So I do you see.


Ay, but you don't advance.





Yes all of 'em.


Pray, Sir, what says she? Does she know 'em again?


Ay, and remember 'em very well.


That Is good News in troth, I wish the poor Gentlewoman well with all my Heart.
-- Be pleased to walk in, my Lady has looked for ye some time. --

Yonder comes that precious Rogue Parmeno, -- In the Name of Heaven, how
unconcern'dly the Fellow stalks it? -- But I believe I have found out a way to
revenge my self on him as I would wish. -- I Will go in and see the Truth of this
Discovery, then I Will come again and fright the Rascal to some Tune.


Cherea carries on his Intrigue; which if it be managed cunningly, goodly,
goodly! what Monuments of Praise are due to my Worship? For to say nothing of
procuring him the Person he loves without Trouble, Fees, or Charges, when the
Amor might have proved very difficult and costly from a covetous Bawd: I Have
done that which I think I deserve a Statue for; Having shown this Spark a way
to know all the tricks and customs of these common Jilts, and by timely notice
to abhor 'em for ever after. When they are abroad forsooth, none so cleanly,
none so modish and genteel, none so delicately neat as they: when their
Ladyships feast with their Gallants, they feed as nicely as possible: But to
see the insatiable Gluttony, the vile Nastiness, the griping Penury of these
filthy Jades at home, how greedy of a Crust, how eagerly they slabber and soss
up Brown-George out of stinking Pottage; to know all this before hand may be
the saving of a young man







Parmeno, an ungracious Wretch to betray him hither!


What Is in the wind now?





Heavens! what new mischief's this? Is my Plot come to this then? -- I Will even
speak to her. Pythia? what is that you talked of? who is that will be made an
Example


Do You ask that, ye desperate Fool? why you have quite ruined the young Gentleman
you had brought for the Eunuch, when you thought, I warrant, you had put a
trick upon us


How so? -- what has happened? -- Prithee tell me.


I will so. -- You don't know then that the Girl that was presented to my Lady
to day, is a Gentlewoman o^ this Town, and her Brother a Person of Quality


I know nothing on it.


But so it proved. -- And 'twas she that your poor wretch ravished. When her
Brother knew of it, a most bloody-minded Fellow, --


What did he do?


-- First bound him Hand and Foot, 'twou'd grieve your heart to see it. --


Bound him? Damnation!


-- Tho my Lady begged all she could for him.


What say ye?


Now he threatens to serve him like a common Horner, a thing I never saw, nor
would not for the world


With what Face can he answer so great a Villainy? Pyth. Why so great, I beseech
you


Why is not it the greatest of all Villainies? -- Pray, who e're heard of one
apprehended for a Fornicator in a common Bawdy House


I cannot tell that.


That you may not say you don't know on it, this I declare, and forewarn you,
that it is no less than Mr. Phedrie's Brother, --


How? Prithee, 'tisn't he? Is It?


-- Therefore your Lady had best take care he comes to no harm -- But why don't
I break into the House my self?


Have a care what you do Parmeno, you will do him no good, and ruin your self
into the Bargain; for every body believes it is all your contrivance


will, tho I certainly know I shall make a Rod so my own Breech. Necessity has
no Law, he must rescue his poor Son


You do well. -- I Will go in. -- Be sure you tell him the whole Story from the
beginning to the end


Parmeno? -- It Is he, as I hope to live. -- Parmeno! Who is it you wait for at
this House





Who do you wait for? Hah!


I Am Thunderstruck, I cannot wag my Tongue for fear.


Ha! What Is the matter? Why do you shake so? Is all well at home? Prithee tell me.


First I Would have you be fully satisfied of this one thing, Sir, that whatever
has happened, I Am as innocent as a newborn Babe


Why, what is the matter?


That Is well asked, for I should ha'^ told you that before. -- Mr. Phedrie
bought an Eunuch, which he presented to this woman


To what woman?


Thais.


He buy Eunuchs? -- S'bud, I Am undone then. -- what did he cost?


Fifty pounds.


I must run my Country then.


Then his Brother Cherea fell in Love with a Musick-Wench.


How! what? Is he in Love too? Does he know what belongs to that Sport already?
Is he come from his Post to the City? -- One Plague upon another!


Pray Sir, don't you direct your Discourse to me, I was not his Counselor.


Speak another word about your self, you Hangman? and as I live. -- But tell me
the whole business quickly


Mr. Cherea was sent there instead of the Eunuch, Sir.


Instead of the Eunuch.


Very true Sir, and now they have appehended him for a Rape, and have bound him
Hand and Foot


Hell and Furies!


But mark the Impudence of these Jades.


Is there any Roguery you have not told me on yet?


You Have heard all, Sir.


Why don't I break in upon 'em?











Parmeno. -- But where in the name of goodness shall I find him?


Of My Soul she looks for me.





What Is the matter Mrs. Impertinence? What wo^'d you be at? what are you so
tickled at? -- what never a done


Oh my Sides! -- I Have almost burst my Sides with Laughing at thee.


Your Reason, pray?


A pretty Qnestion! -- Faith, you are the arrantest Ass I e're did, or shall
set my Eyes on? It Is utterly past my skill to tell thee what excellent Sport
thou have made within. -- I took thee for a cunning ingenious Fellow. --


How Is this?


Had ye no more wit than to believe presently what I said? were you not ashamed
of the Villainy you put the poor Gentleman upon, but you must tell Tales of him
to his Father? How simply did he look, think ye, when his Father surpised him
in that disguise? What? Don't you see what a fine pass you have bronght your
self to


Ha! How Is this you filthy Carrion? Did ye tell me a Lie, and then laugh at the
Wit on it? Do You think it such fine Sport to abuse us ye Jade


Oh the finest sport in the World.


Do You think you shall not pay dearly for this?


Perhaps so.


Ay, Faith shall ye.


I fancy as much. These Threats may come to Morrow, but you will be hanged to day
for entering a young Gentleman a Debauchee, and then discovering it, they will
both have a pull at your Coat for this


I Am a Reprobate.


You see the Reward of your Roguery; and so Good b'ye to ye.








Who I? I Will even surrender my self to her upon discretion, and even do as
she would have me


How, Sir?


Why should I be less submissive to this Lady than Hercules was to Omphala?


A pat Example, -- would I could see the Slipper flung at your soft Head too.





Why's he so merry trow?


My dear Parmeno! It Is to thee I Am indebted for the Rise, the Advancement, and
the Perfection of my Comforts. -- Do know my dear sweet Creature's proved a
Gentlewoman? --


I heard it by the bye, Sir.


-- And that she is to be my Bride?


As I hope to be Knighted that is Admirable.


Do You hear, Sir, what he says?


Then I am heartily glad my Brother's Amors are in such a happy Condition. The
Families are both united now; Thais has put her self wholly under my Father's
Care and Protection, and is wholly ours


Then, Mr Phedrie is like to have her for good and all.


Yes, indeed.


This too is worth a laughing at, for the mighty Captain's routed.


Do you take care that my Brother may know of this as soon as ye can,
wheresoever he be


I Will see for him at home.


So Gnatho, Do not think I Am gone to all Intents and Purposes?


There Is no thinking otherwise.




Or whom commend most? Him that advised me to do it, or my self that had the
Heart to venture upon it, or the good Fortune that directed us both, and that
brought so many Circumstances of so great moment, and so luckily too into the
Compass of one Day. --

Or shall I praise the Indulgence of my Father?

Great Jove! that do poor Mortals Fate secure,secure,

Grant that our Joys may with our Lives endure.


Parmeno tells me Wonders. But where is my Brother?


Here at your Service.


I Am extremely glad for your good Fortune, Brother.


I believe so, and truly Brother, there is never a Mistress more worthy to be
beloved then yours, she has so vastly obliged our Family


Hey-day! Do you commend her before my Face.


Gnatho, I rely wholly upon thee


What would you have me do Sir?


Bring it about either for Love or Money. that I may continue a little in Madam
Thais Favor


That will be hard.


You can do it I know, if you give your Mind to it: If ye perform it, Command
what Gift or Reward you please, it is your own


Shall it so Sir?


It shall indeed.


Why then Sir, if I do it, I desire to have free Egress and Regress into your
House, whether you be at home or abroad, and a Place at your Table, whether
invited or no


It shall be so upon my Honor.


Well, I Will make an Effort.


Whose Tongue's that? -- O Captain is it you?


Gentlemen, I Am your humble Servant.


Perhaps you know not what has happened at this House.


Yes Sir, I do.


What makes ye scouting in these Quarters then?


Under your Protection, Gentlemen. --


Do You know the Protection you're to expect? Take this from me Good Man Captain,
if I find you sauntering here again in the Street, you mustn't think to sham me
off with; I was looking for a Friend, and my Business lay this way, for you're
like to have no Quarter


Soft Sir, that is not like a Gentleman.


I Will be no worse than my word.


Indeed Sir, I didn't think you would been so huffy.


You Will find it just so.


Pray be pleased, Gentlemen, to hear your Servant Gnatho, a word or two, and
then do what you please in this Affair


Lets hear't then.


Do you Captain move a little a


Out with it then.


What if you took the Captain in amongst ye too?


How amongst us?


Consider a little better Sir. -- Why faith you and your Mistress live very
high, for you're used to an easy splendid Life, you have but a small Allowance
your self; and this Thais will be requiring more: Now that you may supply her,
and save your own Pocket, there is not a fitter or more convenient Ur^nsil than
this Blunderbuss i'th^whole World. F^^ (...), he has Money enough at Command,
and ^^e more prodigal on it than he. Then he is a Soft-headed Fool, and a
Half-witted Coxcomb, and a sumbling Fellow that snores Night and Day. Ye^
needn't fear the Gentlewoman's falling in Love with him; then you may kick him
out of Doors when you please. --





Then, Sir, what is best of all, he treats as high and nobly as a Lord.


Ten to one but we may have occasion for this fool sometime or other.


I Am of that Mind too.


Gentlemen, I Am obliged to you. -- One Favor more let me beg of you, to admit
me also into your retinue. -- I Have been cleaving of that Block long enough
already


We grant it.


And with all our Hearts.


Then in requital Gentlemen, here is to the fleecing and jeering the Cully to
death


That Is well.


He deserves it.





And prithee how do Matters stand?


How? the Gentlemen didn't know your worth: when I had informed 'em of your
good Qualities, and given 'em a Character of ye as your noble Actions and
Virtues deserve, your Suit was granted.





Didn't I tell ye how choice he was of his Expressions; polite upo' my word.


Now there is nothing wanting; You may retire.

Gentlemen adieu, one kind Applause.



