THE Mother-in-Law.

A COMEDY, Acted at the Roman Sports, WHEN S. Julius Caesar, and Cn. Cornelius
Dolabella, were Curule Edil's

At that time it was not Acted quite through.

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was performed upon
two Equal FLUTES

It was taken wholly from the Greek of Apollodorus.

Acted first under the Consulship of Cn. Octavius and T. Manlius.

It was Acted a second time at a Funeral Solemnity.

Acted a third time, when Q. Fulvius, and L. Murcie, were Curule Edil's.

A. V. C. 588. Before Christ 155.

Scene, ATHENS.

TIME, about Six or Seven Hours.

The Street, before and s Door. The Forenoon In Faith, old Syra, there is not one
in forty of these young Fellows that keeps touch with a Mistress -- Why here is
Mr. Pamphilus now, how many thousand Oaths has he sworn to Bacchis (and
solemnly too, that one could not but believe him) that he would never marry while
she lived. Very good, yet my Gentleman's married for all that


For that Reason, Girl, let me advise and conjure you as a Friend to pity none
of the Sex; but fleece em maul 'em, pick the very Bones of every Creature of
em, that you get in your Clu^ches


What all without exception?


Ay every Mothers Son of em. -- Take this from an old Woman, that there is none
of these Sparks that are so sweet upon ye, that has any other design than to
have his will of ye, at as cheap a rate as he can. And prithee Child, shou'dn't
thou in justice countermine 'em


But to serve all alike is too cruel, I vow.


Cruel to be revenged of ones Enemies? Or to take Cheats in their own Traps?
Ah! what pity it is, that I had not that Youth and Beauty of yours, or you those
Sentiments of these Matters that I have




Pamphilus comes home -- Do You hear, Boy? If he asks for me, you may tell him
so; if not say nothing; then this Excuse will keep cold for another time. --
Philly there? -- Whence comes she, I wonder? -- Philotis, I Am heartily glad to
see ye


And I you, honest Parmeno.


Gods-buddikins, Parmeno, how do thou do my Lad?


Uds fish, Grannum, how do thou? Ex. Syra. But prithee, Mrs. Philly, where
have you been diverting your self this live-long while


But little diversion, Heaven knows; e're since I marched off with the Captain
to Corinth, the meerest Brute upon Earth, where I led a very Dog's Life for two
whole Years together


Ay faith! I warrant ye, you often sighed for old Athens again, and could have
wished your self hanged for undertaking the Journey


It Is impossible to tell ye how eager I was to come home to get clear of my
Spark, and to see ye all once more; where I might have free liberty to enjoy my
Friends and Merry-meetings as formerly. For there I could not utter a Word but
what was shaped out by that rascally Captain


That same cutting ye short of your tattle, I fancy, must needs go against the
grain


Well: But what a business is this that Bacchis has been telling of me within?
I could never have imagined Pamphilus could have found in his heart to marry as
long as she lived


Marry quoth a?


Hey-day! Why is not he married.


Married indeed: But I have a conceit this Marriage will not hold long.


Pray Heavens it may not, if it be to Baschis's Advantage. -- But how shall I
be certain of it? Good Boy, satisfy me in that


'Tisn't a thing to be asked: Therefore pray don't be so inquisitive.


You're afraid, I warrant, that I should blaze it abroad: But let me perish if
I ask ye upon any such design, but only for my own private Satisfaction


All your fine Wheadling shall never persuade me to trust my Back to your
Discretion


Well don't then, who cares? As if now you had not much more mind to tell me,
than I to know.





So: Now you're come to your self again. -- Upon my Honor then: away with it.


Mind me then. Phil. Well.


Mr. Pamphilus was in the very height of his Passion for Mrs. Bacchis, when his
Father began to be earnest with him to marry. He alleged the usual Arguments
of all Fathers in the like Case, namely, That he was an old Man, had no Child
but him, and desired that he might not be destitute of a Support in his old
Age. At first he rejects the Proposal; but when his Father came to press on the
Business more zealously than ordinary, he was brought to such straits that he
could not tell which to prefer either Love or Duty. At last the old Man by
baiting and teazing his Son's Heart out, screwed him up to his Pitch, and got
him made sure to his next Neighbors Daughter. Pamphilus didn't take it in such
dudgeon till his wedding day came on; but when he saw all things ready; and
without more ado, marry he must; he laid it so much to heart, that I Am
persuaded if Bacchis her self had seen him in that plight, she could not but
have pitied him. For whene're he had any spare time of being by himself, he would
call me aside to him and cry, Ah, Parmeno, I m a lost Man What have I done?
What a dismal Condition have I brought my self into? I an't able to bear the
weight of it: Oh, 'twill break my Heart


The Devil and his Damm take this Laches for a baiting old Cur.


To cut short of my Story, the Bride was brought home: The first Night he did
not touch her: and the following was the same. --


The Duce take ye: what, a young Fellow to have his Bride in Bed with him on
the wedding-night, and pretty tipsie too, I warrant ye, and not -- A likely
business in troth: Come, this sounds like a Lie


I know you cannot tell how to believe me, ^ cause none comes to you, but he
comes sharp set: But alas, our young Gentleman had no Stomach at all to his
woman


Well, but what then?


A few days after, he takes me privately aside, and tells me, She was as good a
Maid as ever for all him; and that before he married, he hop d a Wise might have
gone down pretty well; but now (said he) I m resolved to part with her e're
long. Twould be a buseness in me, and much to the prejudice of the poor
Gentlewoman to abuse her so, as not to return her to her Friends, as I received
her


T was done like a Man of Principles and Modesty.

Par. But then (continued he) ^wont be safe to publish my Intentions: and for
me to send her back to her Father, and have nothing to say against her, would
be too peremptory. All my hope is, when she finds there is no living together,
that she will be gone of her own accord


But all this while did he continue his Visits to Bacchis.


As constantly as the day came about: But (as it is usual for Women) when she
saw him another, she became more peevish and pretending than formerly


I faith, and well she might.


And this indeed was the chief cause of their parting. For by this time he had
recollected himself, and seriously considered his Mistress's Temper and his
Wife's; and well compared their Behaviors together. His Wife, he found, was a
sweetnatured Gentlewoman; virtuous and modest, patient under the Affronts and
Incivilites of a Husband, and willing to wink at his Faults. So that partly
touched with remorse for his usage of his Wife, and partly tired with the
insolence of his Whore; at last he gave Bacchis the slip, and settled his
Affections upon this woman, whose Humor he found so agreeable to his own. --
Mean time, an old Kinsman of our Master dies at Imbros, and made him his Heir;
and upon this unwilling Errand is our Lovesick Pamphilus posted away by his
Father. He leaves his Lady with his Mother; for the old Gentleman lives retired
in the Country, and seldom visits the Town


But where is this Flaw in the Match all the while?


I Am going to tell ye: At first, for a few days or so, the Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law agreed mighty well together. When all on a sudden the young
woman began to hate the old one most mortally, without any Quarrel or Complaint
on either side


How came it about then?


If at any time my old Lady Sostrata came to have a little Chat with her, she would
presently avoid the Room, and fly the Sight of her: But when she could away
with her Company no longer, she pretends her Mother had sent for her upon some
business of Devotion; and away she goes. After she had been there a while, my
Lady sends and desires her Company at home, she only returns her a lame excuse
of I know not what. She sends a second time, but no Gentlewoman comes: At last
after many Messages they pretend she is sick. Upo' this, any Lady steps over
her self, to give her a Visit, but no admittance could be got. When this came
to my old Master's Ears, yesterday he came out of the Country upo'this very
account, and discourses her Father about it. I cannot learn as yet what passed
between them? but I Am in a peck of troubles to know what will come on it -- Now
you have the long and the short of my Story. -- I must away to the place I
designed


And so must I too: For I Have made an Assignation with a Country Squire much
about this time


I Will throw an old Shoe after ye, and wish ye good Luck.


Farewell Parmeno.


And farewell to thee, my little Philly.







This is a hard Case, that I should be accused of a business that I know
nothing of


You know nothing of this then?


As I hope for merc^, I don't: And as I hope (my dear Laches!) we may live long
together


Heavens forbid that, say I.


That I Am wrongfully accused, time will discover.





Who I?


Woman, I say you: Why you take me surely for a Block and not a Man. Think ye
because I Am retired into the Country, that I know nothing of your Pranks and
Transactions here in Town? But let me tell ye, I know much better what is done
here than at the place of my own residence; and that because my Reputation
abroad depends upon your Behavior at home. I heard indeed long ago that
Philumena could not endure ye, and made no wonder on it; twould have been a
greater Miracle if she could: But I little thought she could not have endured
the whole Family upo' your account; had ^^been aware of that, she should have
staid, and you packed off in faith. -- Pray see, Wife, what small rrason ye have
to vex me thus. I retired into the Country, gave way to ye, afforded ye enough
for your Necessities, and your Pleasures too; and that my Estate might the
better bear it, I Have wearied and toiled my self more than's convenient for my
Age; and could not ye after all this have took care that nothing disturbed my
repose


By all that is good, what has happened was not through my means or fault.


No? Yes, but 'twas: For you're sele Mistress here. and you're only to be
blamed: Sure you might have looked after things in your own House since I Have
taken all other Cares off your hands. An old Woman to stand squabbling with a
Girl? Fie, fie! -- You will not lay the Fault upon her sure


No: Dear Husband, I lay nothing to her charge.


OF my Soul I Am glad of that for poor Pam's sake: But as for you, do the worst
ye can, I cannot think worse of ye than I do


But, good Husband, how do you know, but she may only pretend a displeasure
against me, to be the more at home with her Mother


Never tell me that. Was Not yesterday's shutting the Door against ye sufficient
proof of her hatred


They told me, she was very faint and weak; therefore 'twasn't convenient to
disturb her


She Is sick, I fancy, of your ill Conditions more than of any thing else. And
no wonder in troth: for there is not a Mother of ye all but would have your Sons
marry: And whoever is the Person that pleases you; they must have: And when to
comply with your Humor they are married, to comply with your Humor again,
they must turn their Wives out of doors







Oh! here is my Brother Phidi^pus in good time, I shall know all from him. --


Look ye there now.


Yesterday I waited upon ye about your Daughter; you sent me away as wise as I
came: But let me tell ye, you don't do well to conceal the Cause of your Anger,
if ye design a lasting Alliance between us. If any of us have offended ye, pray
make it out; that so either by disproving or justifying what is done, we may
give as ample Satisfaction as you shall require. If Sickness' be the Cause of
keeping your Daughter at home, let me tell ye, Brother, it is too great a
Reflection upon us to imagine she shou'dn't have due attendance at my House. As
I hope to be saved, tho you are her Father, you shall not outdo me in this: nor
can you be more desirous of her Health than I am; and that for my poor Boys
sake, who I perceive loves her more than his life, and am confident will highly
resent it, when he comes to know on it; therefore pray let us have her home
before he comes back from his Voyage


I Am satisfied, Brother, of your extraordinary Care and Affection for my
Daughter, and am apt to believe every Word you have said; but then I Would ha'ye
believe me too, that it is my hearty desire to have her to your House, if I
could prevail with her by any means


Why what hinders ye? --


Nothing in the World; for when I urged it home to her, and seemed as though I Would
force her to return, she vowed by all that is good, She was not able to endure
your House, while her Pamphilus was away. Every one has his failings, for my
part I Am so soft-natured, I cannot cross and thwart my own Flesh and Blood


Dye hear that Mistress.


Ay, to my Sorrow.


Is that your Resolution then, Brother?


As the Case stands, it is so. -- But have ye any thing else to say? For I Have a
little business calls me in haste to the Piazza


I Will bear ye Company if ye please.







-- WAs ever Man so perplexed in his love as I? Unhappy Wretch! Have I been
such a good Husband of my Life for this? Was It this which made me so desirous
of returning home? Thad been better for me to have spent my days any where in
the World, than to come back hither, and find my self so unhappy here: For
whatever Misfortune befalls a Man, the longer it is before he knows it, is so
much time clearly gained


However, Sir, by your return, you will be able the sooner to make your self
easy. Had you staid away, the Breach would have been far wider. Now, Sir, I Am
confident that your presence will have a great Influence upon them all. So
you will learn the whole Business, rectify Misunderstandings, and make all
Friends again. All these dreadful Apprehensions of yours are in themselves but
very slight things


Why do you pretend to comfort me, when I Am the greatest Wretch alive? Before I
marry d this Woman, my Heart was engag d elsewhere; how much I suffered upon
that account, any one may easily guess, without my telling; and yet I never was
the Man that dared to refuse the Match my Father put upon me: I had but just
weaned my self from Bacchis, and disengaged my Affections; but just fixed my
Love on Philumena; when alas, a new Business happens which forced me to leave
her too: Then I Am afraid I shall find either my Mother or Wife to blame; and if
so, the Consequence must be, that I shall be miserable still. For Duty,
Parmeno, binds me to bear with my Mother's Failings; and for my Wife, I Am a
thousand ways obliged to her, not only for meekly bearing with my Humors, but
also for concealing my unkind Usage to her from all the World. Certainly,
Parmeno, some extraordinary thing must have happe^e^, which gave occasion to
this Quarrel that has now lasted so long


Some fri^olous thing or other I Will warrant ye, Sir: For upon close examination
you will find that the greatest Quarrels han t always the greatest Occasions. It Is
frequent, S^r, to find the same thing make one Man sta^k mad, and your mortal
Enemy for ever, when it does not move another. How do Childrenbite and scratch
for the smallest Trifles! And why? Marry because their Understandings are weak,
and are not able to direct em: And your Women truly are even as soon moved as
Children; one chance word perhaps or so has been the occasion of all this
Disturbance


Well! go in, Parmeno, and let 'em know I Am here.


Hah! What,s here to do.


S't!


Here Is a sad Bustle, they run up and down like mad -- Pray, Sir, come a little
this way. --


Hold your prating. --


So, you enjoin me silence, and talk your self.





That Is like Philumena's Mother's Voice. -- Ruined!


Why so.


Undone!


Wherefore?


Ah, Parmeno, there is some Mischief more than ordinary has happened, which
they conceal from me


They said indeed your Lady was out of order, whether that be it or no, I cannot
tell


I Am a lost Man. -- Why didn't ye tell me this before?


I con'dn't tell ye every thing at once.


What Is her Distemper?


That I cannot tell.


How! Is no body gone for a Doctor?


I cannot tell that neither.


But why don't I go in my self, that I may know for certain what is the
Business? -- Ah my dear Philumena, in what Condition shall I now find thee?
Should thy Life be in danger; I shall certainly die with thee.


Sostrata's Servants came in, brought the Devil along with him, and thereupon
that she grew worse immediately: So my Mistress will be blamed? but I shall have
the worst on it




Philumenas Distemper grows worse and worse: But Heavens forbid it. Now I Will
give her a visit


Hark ye, Madam!


You ll meet with another repulse, Madam.


Parmeno! are you there? -- Alas poor Wretch! What shall I do? Shall Not I go see
my Son's Wife, when she lies sick but at next door


If youd be ruled by me, Madam, neither see her, nor send to see her: For to be
fond of one that perfectly hates you seems a double piece of Folly. You Will
bestow your labor to no purpose, and be troublesome besides. -- Then, Madam
your Son went to see how she did, as soon as he came to Town


How! my Son Pamphilus come ashore?


Yes, Madam.


Heavens be praised. -- That word has revived me, and set my Heart at rest.


Upo' this account especially, I would not have ye go in: For if her Pains be a
little abated, I Am confident, now they are together, she will up and tell him all
that passed between you two; and how the Difference first began -- But see
where he comes. -- He seems very melancholy upon it




Ah, my Dear, dear Child!


Your Blessing, Madam.


Welcome home heartily. -- But how is it with your Wife?


OF the mending hand --


Heavens continue it so. -- But why in tears Son? Why thus melancholy.


Nothing at all, Madam.


What Bustle was that? tell me: Was she taken with a sudden Fit?


Yes Madam.


What Is her Distemper?


An Ague.


A Quotidian?


So they tell me. -- Pray, Madam, walk in, I Will follow immediately.


So I will.


Parmeno, do you run and meet my Servants, and help them home with their
Luggage





You ll be gone will not ye?


Where shall I begin now, to give an account of those many surprising
Misfortunes that have befallen me? Part of which I heard, and part I saw with
these very eyes; which made me run out of the House half distracted. -- For
when I hastily went in just now, in great concern for my Wife (thinking to find
her sick of another-gates Distemper than what, alas! I found her in:) The Maids
being surpised at first sight all of 'em o're-joyd, cried out, Hes come: But
immediately after I perceived they changed Countenance, because I happened to
come at such an unlucky Minute: mean time one of 'em ran up Stairs to give
notice of my Arrival; and I, as eager to see my Wife, follow her directly. No
sooner was I got in, but immediately I perceived her Ailment, unhappy Creature
as I was: For they had no time in the World to conceal the business, for her
Cryings out did sufficiently discover her Condition. When I saw this, Base and
unworthy, said I! And with that immediately flung out of the Room all in Tears,
struck with Horror at such an unheard of dismal Accident. Her Mother, poor
Soul, followed me close, caught me at the Door, and flung her self at my Feet,
melting into Tears: so that I could not but pity her: And truly, I Am of
Opinion, as a Man's Fortune rises or falls so is he up or down. She thus
addressed her self to me: My dear Pamphilus, you're an Eyewitness now of the
Cause that made this unhappy Creature leave your House: She was ravished
sometime since by an unknown Villain; and is now fled hither to hide her shame
from you and the World. But alas! the very Remembrance of her earnest
Entreaties makes me melt afresh. -- Whatsoever Chance or Fortune (continu d
she) has brought you hither at this juncture, by that we both conjure ye (if we
may in Equity and Justice presume so far) to bury and conceal this Mischance
from the Eye of the World. If ever (dear Pamphilus!) if ever you were sensible
that she had any Tenderness for ye, in requital she begs ye not to think that
small Favor too much to grant her. As for taking her again, use your own
discretion. You're the only Person that knows of her Lying in, and that the
Child is none of yours: For they say you had nothing to do with her the first
two Months; and after you had, it is now seven and no more. Your Behavior shows
what your thoughts are about it: Now, if it be possible (my Dear!) I wish and
endeavor nothing more than that her Lying in may be kept from her Father, and
every Soul besides: But should it come out, it shall go for a Miscarriage, I
know none will think otherwise; but, what is most likely, will suppose you the
Father of it. The Child shall immediately be exposed, and you never the worse
for it; and by this means you can suffer no inconvenience, and secure the poor
Girls Reputation besides. -- I passed my Word, and am resolved to keep it: But
for taking her again, I think it no ways for my Honor, nor will I do it; tho
her Love and Conversation have a very great Influence over me. -- I cannot but
weep to think what a melancholy Life I must lead for the future --



But yonder comes Parmeno with the rest, there is no occasion for him to be
hereabouts at this time; for he is the only Person I made privy to my Behavior
to my Wife, when we first married. I fear should he hear her frequent Shrieks,
he will discover her to be in Labor: I must even send him on some Errand or
other till all is over





In sober Sadness, Parmeno, 'tisn't possible to tell thee what a dismal thing
it is to be a Shipboard


Indeed?


Troth you are a happy Fellow, little do thou know what dangers thou escapest
by keeping always on dry ground. To pass over other Hardships, mark but this:
Thirty long Days and Nights or more, was I on Shipboard; expecting evry minute
to be sows'd to the bottom of the Sea, 'twas such plaguey stormy weather all the
time, and the Wind against us


Abominable!


So indeed I found it: In short, if I knew I must go back, rather than do it,
upon my Soul I Would show em a light pair of Heels for it


Ay, old Boy, thou'st been ready for that sport upon slighter occasions than
this: -- But hold, yonder is my Master Pamphilus before that Door, -- Go all in,
and I Will step to him, and see if he has any business wi' me






Are you here still, Sir.


Yes, I stay for you.


What Is your Pleasure?


You must run as far as the Tower.


Who must?


You must.


As far as the Tower? For what pray, Sir?


To find out one Callidemides my Landlord of Myconia, who came over in the same
Vessel wi' me


God's Death! I Will be sworn this Master o'mine has made a Vow, that if e're he got
ashore, he would make me run my heart out.


Why don't ye stir?


Must I say any thing to him, or must I only give him the meeting?


Tell him I cannot meet him to day as I appointed, that he may not stay to no
purpose, -- Fly


But Sir, I don't know what manner of Man he is.


I Will tell ye how to know him presently. -- He Is a huge, fiery-fac'd,
frizzled-crown'd fat Fellow, with wall-eyes, and looks as if he would fright ye





Ay, ay: Run Sirrah.


I beg your Pardon for that, I Am quite foundered already.



He Is gone, -- Now what course shall poor I take? -- I Am at a strange loss how
to conceal Philumenas lying in, as her Mother desired me. I profess, I cannot
but pity the poor Woman. Ill do what I can, but still I Will discharge my Duty to
my Parents, for my Love must give way to my Obedience



But lack-a-day there is my Father and Mr. Phidippus together, -- They make this
way too. -- I cannot devise what to say 'em





Yes.


I hear he is come, let her be brought home then.











O here is the Man we were talking of.


Your Blessing, Sir.


I Am glad to see thee.


Welcome h^me, Pamphilus; I Am also glad to see ye so sound and lusty after your
Vo^age


Im obliged to ye Sir.


Are ye but just landed, Son?


Just now, Sir.


Well! and what has our Kinsman Phanie left us? Hah!


Wh(...) really, Sir, he was a Man given up to his Pleasures in his Lifetime,
and such as he seldom leave much to their Heirs: However they leave this
Commendation behind 'em, that as long as they livd, they lived like Gentlemen


Then thou have brought home nothing but that pretty Sentence instead of an
Estate


That little he has left, may do us some kindness.


Ah! none at all. -- I wish heartily he were alive and in health again.


You may safely wish that: He Is past wishing for. -- I dare swear I know which
you would choose.







[Aloud to Pamphilus.


But now he will send her home again.


So I will.


Sir, I know the whole business, how every thing has been managed since I went.
I heard the whole Story as soon as e're I arrived


Hang those envious Dev^ls, that were so officious as to tell it y^.


Im sure I took all possible care to ^void giving an^ of ye the least offense:
And had I^ mind to it, I could here tell ye how faithful, loving, and kind I Have
been to her; but I had rather ye should hear't from her own Mouth: For by that
means you ll the sooner believe my good Nature, when the Relation comes from
her that at present is so unkind to me. Heavens my witness, I had no hand at
all in this Difference: But since she thinks her self too good to stoop to my
Mother, when Modesty might have taught her to have born with her Humor; and
since there is no other way of composing the Difference, I must even part with
either one or the other. But now, Mr. Phidippus, Filial Duty obliges me to take
my Mother's part before my Wifes


I am not displeased, Pamphilus, to find ye so ready to sacrifice all to the
Interests of your Parents: But have a care you don't engage too far in this
Quarrel


How can I engage my self in a Quarrel against her, that never disobligd me in
any thing, but on the contrary has obliged me in many things? I love her,
honor her, and still desire with all my Soul to keep her: For I Have always
found her of a wonderful sweet Temper toward me; therefore I wish with all my
Heart she may spend the remainder of her days with a more fortunate Husband
than me; since mere necessity tears her from me


It Is in your own power to hinder that.


Take her home again, if you be wise.


That Is not my intention, Sir. I must now consult my Mother's Interest.


Whether now? -- Stay, stay, I say. -- Where are ye going?


What Whim's this?


I told ye, Brother, how highly he would resent this; and therefore beggd of ye to
send home your Daughter in time


'Sbud I didn't think he had been such a Churl. Does he think Ill go cringing
with Cap in Hand to him? If he is disposed to take home his Wife, well and good;
if not, let him refund her Portion, pack off, and a F -- for him


Look ye now; you're in as great a Fume as he.


Pamphilus, You're grown mighty huffish methinks after your Voyage. --


His anger will soon be over, tho indeed he had some cause.


Because forsooth you have got a little more Pelf fallen to ye, you swell so much
upon it


What? You Will fall out wi'me too?


Let him consider on it, and tell me to day, whether he will have her or no; that
if he will not another may.




Stay Brother, hear me but one word. -- He Is gone: -- But what is this to me? In
short, let 'em order their Matters as they please for me, since neither Brother
nor Son will hear Reason, nor mind one Word I say, Ill turn all my Forces upo'
my W^fe, the Promoter of all this Mischief, and discharge all that sticks in my
Stomach upon her




I Am ruined! What shall I do? -- Which way shall I turn my self? -- Alas! What
answer can I give my Husband? I Am persuaded he heard the Child cry, which made
him run so hastily into my Daughters Chamber, without saying a word. Should he
find that she is in Labor, I vow I cannot devise what excuse to invent for the
concealing of it. -- The Door goes, -- I Am afraid hes upo'the Scent after me.
-- I Am no Woman of this World







Meaning me, my dear Husband?


I your Husband? Do You regard me as a Husband, or so much as a Man? For had ye
esteemed me either one or the other (Gentlewoman!) you daren't have made me such a
public Scorn by your baseness


By what baseness?


By what? -- Is Not your Daughter brought to bed? -- Hah! are ye Tongue-tyd now?
-- Who Is the Father pray


Is that a Question for a Father to ask? -- Dear Heart, who do you think should
be but her own Husband


I believe it, nor is it for a Father to think otherwise: But I Am amazed why ye
should so carefully keep all in hugger-mugger from us, especially when she was
delivered at her full time, and all things were as they should be. Could ye be
so damnably malicious, as to wish the poor Child's Death; which you knew would
be the occasion of a more lasting Friendship between us, rather than suffer Man
and Wife to live together contrary to your cross-grained Humor. -- I took it
to be wholly their fault, but now I find it is all long of you


Im a miserable Creature.


Would I were sure of that -- It now comes fresh into my mind, what you
formerly said on this subject, when the Match was first made. You professed
forsooth, that you could not away with a Son-in-law that kept his Wenches, and
lay abroad whole Nights together


I had rather he should suspect any thing i't'h world, than guess at the true
Cause.


I knew that he kept a Mistress (Madam Wife!) long before you did: But I never
counted that such a mighty fault in a young Man; for it is what we are all born
with, but the time will quickly come when he will hate himself for it: But you I
see are still the same, and could never be at quiet till you had parted em, and
nulled the Marriage, 'cause it was of my making. Now it is plain how rarely you
stood affected to the Match


Can ye suppose me so base and cruel to my own Flesh and Blood, if this Match
had been to our advantag


Pish! You able to foresee or judge what is to our advantage? May be some body
informed informed you that they saw him going to or coming from his Mistress.
And what of all that, if he did it privately, and but seldom? Is Not it more
handsome for us to wink at such flailings, than blaze 'em abroad and get nothing
but ill will to our selves by the bargain? For could he so suddenly draw his
Affections from one he has loved so many years, I shou'dn't count him a man,
nor think him half stanch and constant enough for my Daughter


Good Husband, no more of the young man; nor of my pretended faults neither: Go
and meet him privately, and ask him whether he will take home his wife or no: If
he says yes, send her away, if not, I think I Have taken a wise course with my
Daughter


If he would not receive her, and you knew him in fault, Wife; I was not far off,
pray why was not I consulted; withal? This mads me to the Heart, to find that ye
dare do such a thing without my leave. I charge ye upon your Life, not to let
^he Child stir out of the House. -- But what a Blockhead am I to think she will
mind what I say? I Will go in my self, and strictly charge my Servants, to let no
body carry it away.




Let me die if I don't believe I Am the unhappiest Woman in the world: In good
truth, I plainly foresee how extremely ill he will take it if he knew all, since
he is so very angry for that little he does know; nor can I imagine how to alter
his Resolution. -- And this is the only Evil that could have befallen me after
all my other Disasters, if I should be forced to bring up a Child we don't know
the Father of. For when my Daughter was ravished, 'twas so dark she could not
discern his Face, nor yet get any Token from him, whereby to discover him
afterward (...) only when the Fellow left her, he forced a Ring off her
Finger. Upon the whole matter I Am strange^y afraid Mr. Pamphilus, when he comes
to hear w^ bring up another Man's Child instead of his, will no longer conceal
what we desired him to keep private.




Pamphilus, you suspect 'twas long of my humors that your Wife left us,
dissemble the matter as much as ye please: but may I never obtain Mercy, no
enjoy that Comfort from ye I expect, if e're to my knowledge I did any thing
that should give her any disgust against me. I always believed you respected
me, but now you have given certain proof of it: for your Father has been telling
me within, how far you prefer my Reputation to your Love. And now I design to
return ye the like Complement, and let ye know how highly I esteem such
Dutifulness. I believe, my dear Son, 'twill be better for both your
Satisfaction and my Reputation, if I retire into the Country with your Father,
as I Have fully resolved, so my presence will be no Eyesore to ye, nor any
pretense for your Wife's staying away


Pray, Madam, what do you mean by this? Shall her silly Freaks drive you into the
Country? It must not be; nor can I endure to have the envious world say, 'Twas
done through my wilfulness, and not your good Nature: Besides, I would not for
e're so much ha'ye upon my account, banished the Enjoyment of your Friends,
Relations, and all the Diversions of the Town


Truly Son, I Have now but little relish of these Enjoyments. Time was indeed
when I had my fill of them; but now I Am quite weary of those Gamhals. At present
my chief care is to keep my Age from being a burden to others, that so they
may not wish for my end* Here I find I Am despised without cause, and it is time
to retreat: By this means I fancy, I shall cut off all cause of Discontent,
clear my self of hard Suspicions, and humor 'em all: Therefore pray let me
avoid those Scandals we Women generally lie under


How happy am I upon all accounts, were it not for this; since I have such a
Mother and such a Wife!


Good, dear Boy, as the Case stands, try to make shift with one inconveniency.
If other things go according to your mind* and your Wife is as I take her to
be, grant me this one request, my Child, and have her home


Ah! I Am very unhappy.


And I too: For I Am as much concerned at it^ as you can be, my dear Child, for
the Soul of ye




So Wife, I overheard all your discourse just by here. It Is Policy to comply
freely with the Occasion, when you know force would follow else


May it succeed well.


March into the Country then, and there we'll both bear with one another
humors


I hope we shall.


Go in then, and pack up what things you will have occasion for. -- I Am fix^d.


I shall obey your Orders.


But, Sir! --


Well, Pamphilus.


Will ye send my Mother into the Country? By no means.


Why not?


Because, Sir, as yet I Am not resolved what to do with my Wife


How! What should ye do but take he^ home again?





That Is more than you know: However 'tisn't a Pin matter to you whether they be
Friends or Foes, when once your Mother's out of the way. The truth on it is, we
old Folks are no good Compan^ to you young ones; and therefore we had even as
good go our way. In short, Pamphilus, your Mother and I are become By-words
to ye, The old Man, and the old Woman. -- -- But yonder comes my Brother i^th'
Critical minute. Let Us give him the meeting







O Brother, you're come at the best time in the World.


Why so?


What answer shall I give 'em, or how be able to keep this Secret!


You may tell your Daughter, my Wife's going into the Country, so she needn't
be afraid to come home to her Husband


Poh! Your Wife's innocent of all; it is my Wife that is the Broacher of all
this, --


Nay, then the Case is alter^d.


-- And has caused all this ado, Mr. Laches


Let 'em cause what ado they please, so I don't take her home again.


Now Pamphilus I wish nothing more, if it can be brought about than that there
may be a lasting Alliance between us. If you are of another mind, pray take the
Child however


He knows of that too: I Am past all hope


The Child? Prithee what Child?


Why we have a Grandson, Brother. F^^ my Daughter when she left your House,
was big it seems; and I never so much as knew of her breeding till now


Good, in troth, as I Am an honest Man; I Am heartily glad it is born, and your
Daughter well. -- But what a strange sort of a Woman is your wife Pam? what odd
kind of Fancies she has about her, so long to keep things in the dark from us?
I vow I cannot say how unhandsome it looks


Truly, Brother, I Am as little pleased at the proceedings as you.


My mind was in suspense before, but now it is fixed; since she is to bring a
Brat with her that is none of mine.


Come, come, Pam, it is too late to stand shally, shally. --


I Am ruined, --


I Have often wished for that happy day of having one to call you Father. It Is
come at last, Heavens be praised. --


-- Beyond Redemption.


-- Take home your Wife, without any more grumbling.


Truly, Sir, had she been minded to have had Children by me, or to have been
still my Wife, I Am certain she would never have concealed what I understand she has.
Now, since I plainly see she has withdrawn her Love from me, I don't believe we
shall ever agree well hereafter: why then should I take her again


Poh! the young Girl did all by the Mothers Persuasion; and is that such a
strange thing? Do You expect to find any woman in the World without their Faults?
Han't Men their Failings too


Well! Look to it your selves both of ye, whether ye think to have her or leave
her: I cannot answer for all that my foolish Wife does: For my own part, do what
you will, you shall not find me unreasonable on either side: Mean time what shall
we do wi' the Child


A wise Query, in troth! Let the Business go which way it will send the Child
hither, since it is his, that we may nurse it as ours


Shall I bring up that Child that the Mother takes no care of?


What Is that you say? Not bring it up, Pamphilus? Good-now shall we make away
with^t? -- Why this is downright madness: Upo' my Life I can hold no longer.
Now you force me to say what I would not have said before your Fatherin-Law. You
could not have her home because of your Mother; She promises to leave the whole
House to your selves: Since that Excuse will not hold good now, forsooth, The
Child's born without your Knowledge. You're mightily mistaken if ye think I
don't know what you hanker after: How long did I wink at your keeping a Miss,
in hopes at last of bringing ye over to a Wife? How patiently did I bear your
lavish Expenses that way? I plied ye, I entreated ^e to marry; told ye 'twas
high time, and by much persuasion, you did. Then you obeyed me, as your Duty
obliged ye to do: But now you're in with your Whore again; and to pleasure her,
will ruin your Wife, I plainly see you're relapsing into your old course of
Debaucheries


Who I, Sir?


Yes you; and let me tell ye it is base to invent shams, to quarrel with your
Wife, that when ^nce she is out of sight, you may the better live with your
Strumpet. Your Wife was sensible of this; or what reason had she to leave the
house else


He has hit upon it; certainly that is the reason.


If you please, Sir, I Will give it upon Oath, that it is nothing so as you
imagine


For shame, take home your Wife then, or give us a better reason why you will not.


'Tisn't convenient at this time.


Take care of the Child then: that I hope is in no fault: We'll consider of the
Mother afterward







Do You steal away? What? Give us no direct Answer? -- Do You think he is not
crack-brain'd? -- Well! it is no matter, Brother, send the Child to me and I Will
bring him up


With all my Heart. -- I don't wonder if his Wife been't pleased with these
fine doings; women are fretful Pieces, and cannot away with such Affronts. This
is the cause of their Quarrel; my wife told me on it her self, but I would not
mention it before him, nor would I believe it at first; but now tisas clear as
the Sun; I perceive now he is a downright Marriage-hater


What should I do in the Case? what would ye advise me to?


What? why, first I think it is best for us to go to his Miss: Let us first
discourse her calmly, then charge her home; and if that will not do, let us
threaten her severely, if ever she has any thing more to do with your Son


I Will follow your Advice. --

Step over to my Neighbor Bacchis; and tell her I Would speak with her presently.
--

And I mnst desire you, Brother, to stand by me in this business.


Ah, Sir, I Have often told ye; and am still of the same mind, that I desire
nothing so much as that the Alliance between us may be lasting, if it be
possible to bring it about; and I hope we shall do it. -- But would ye have me
here when she comes


No; you may go and provide a good Nurse for the Child.


Laches send to speak wi me now. But in troth, I Am mightily mistaken if I don't
guess ^^ the business


Bacchis your Servant.


Yours, good Mr. Laches.


Troth, I don't question but you somewhat wonder, why I sent to speak with ye


And really when I consider my self, I am afraid lest the Scandal of my Trade
should be ^o my prejudice; for as to my behavior in it, I defy the World --


If it be so; you have no reason to be afraict of me, Woman; for I Am of those
Years that a false Step is not so easily pardonable in me; therefore am the
more cautious to do nothing rashly. If both now and ever you do what ye can
justify, 'twould be very unhandsome in me to do ye any injury, and very unjust
since ye don't deserve it


Upo' my word I Am extremely obliged to ye for that: For after an injury's done,
begging of one's Pardon is but small amends. -- But pray, Sir, your Pleasure


I hear you entertain my Son Pamphilus. -- Bac.


Hear me out. -- Before he married, I winked at your Amors. -- Pamphilus will
not always have the same Inclinations, nor troth you the same Beauty


Pray, Sir, who reports this?


His Mother-in-Law.


That I entertain him?


Yes, you: For that reason has she taken home her Daughter, and would privately
have made away with the Child she has by him


Sir, If I knew any thing more Sacred than an Oath to convince ye, I Would freely
offer it to ye, that I had never any thing to do with your Son, since he married


Thou art a dainty fine girl! But can ye guess what further Favor I Would desire
of ye


What is it, good Sir?


Only to step just in there,


I Will obey you, Sir: but in good earnest; there is never a one in my
Circumstances would have don't, or shown her face before a young married woman
upon such an account: but I scorn to see your Son scandalized upon a false
story, or be undeservedly thought inconstant by such as should have a better
opinion of him. He has done me many a good turn, and now I Will do him one


Your smooth Tongue has made me conceive a more favorable opinion of ye; for
twasn't only their Surmises, but I thought as bad of ye my self too. -- Since
I Have now found ye otherwise than we took ye to be, pray see that you prove
still the same, and you may find a Friend of me: but if ye don't, -- Well, I
say no more for fear of disobliging ye. -- This I Will advise ye, that you would
rather try what I can do as your Friend, than as your Enemy


I Will do my best, Sir, to satisfy ye.







See, there comes our Son's Father-in-law: He has got him a Nurse for the
Child. -- Brother! here is Mrs. Bacchis swears by all the Gods. --


Is that she?


Yes.


Troth, these sort of Creatures care little for the Gods, and the Gods as
little for them


Take my Servants here, rack the truth out of 'em if ye please. The business is
now on foot, and I Am obliged to reconcile Mr. Pamphilus and his Lady; which if
I do, I shall get me Credit enough by being the only Person of m^ Profession,
that would have undertaken such a Business


this Woman now, for when your Wife once perceives her mistake, she will quickly
be pacified; but if Pamphilus be angry 'cause his Wife was brought to Bed
privately, that is a trifle, he will soon be satisfied: And E'dad I can see
nothing i'this business that is worth falling out about


Troth, would it were so as you say.


Examine her your self, since she is here, she will satisfy ye, I Will engage for it.


What need all this? Don't ye know my Mind already i'this Matter? Let her but
satisfy the Women and I Am content


Bacchis, I I must desire ye to be as good as your word to me.


Would ye have me go in, Sir, about this business.


Yes; and satisfy them, that they may believe it too.


I will, Sir; but I am sure to be no welcome Guest there; For a young Woman,
parted from her Husband upo' this account, is a mortal Enemy to a Courtesan


They Will be your Friends, when once they know on what Errand you are come.


I Will pass my word for that too, when they come to know your business: For
you will clear them of a Mistake, and your self of all Suspicion


Alack-a-day, I Am so ashamed to look Madam Philumena in the Face. --




What could I have wished for more than what has happened to this Woman, that
she might procure her self Fri^nds without costing her any thing, and do me a
kindness into the Bargain: For if in reality she has withdrawn her self from
Pamphilus, it will be very much to her Interest, Reputation and immortal
Honor. For this one Act will for ever oblige my Son, and gain her our
Friendship




OF my Conscience this Master of mine counts my labor worth nothing; he
would not else ha'send me thus upon a Fool's Errand as far as the Tower; where
I Have loyter'd away a whole day in gaping for Callidemides, the Myconian Friend.
There did I sit all day like a Simpleton, asking every body that came by, Pray,
Sir, said I, are you a Myconian? No; says he. Is your name Callidemides? quoth
I. No, quoth he: Are you acquainted with one Mr. Pamphilus? All answered i^th'
Negative. OF my Soul there is no such Man in the World. Faith, at last I was
damnably out o^ Countenance, and fairly slunk away. --



But what is the meaning of Bacchis's coming out of our Father-in-Law's? What
has she to do there


O Parmeno! You could not come in a better time. You must run for your Master
Pamphilus in all haste


What for?


Tell him, I Would pray him to step hither a little.


To you, Madam?


No; to his Lady.


What Is to do there?


Nothing about you; therefore don't be so inquisitive.


Must I say nothing else?


Yes; tell him that Madam Myrrhina challenges the Ring he formerly ga^ me, and
says 'twas her Daughters


I understand ye: Does the business require su^ch haste?


Yes, indeed: He^ll be here in a trice, when you tell him of it. -- What are
you asleep


Not in the least; nor I suppose an't like to day; for I have spent it already
in running and trapesing all o^re the Town.




What great satisfaction has my coming procured Mr. Pamphilus to day? How many
Blessings have I brought him? And how many troubles have I freed him from? I
have saved him a Son, which his Wife, his Mother, and he were thinking to make
away with; recovered him a Loving Wife, whom he was just upon casting off, and
cleared him from the unjust Suspicions of both his Fathers -- This is the Ring
Prithee my dear Pam (said I) for Love's sake, why so strangely disordered?
Where got ye this Ring? Prithee tell me. He pretended to mind something else?
at that I grew more suspicious, and urged him to tell me: At last my Gentleman
confesses, That coming along the Street he had forced a young Woman he knew
not; and in struggling took the Ring from her. Myrrhina spyed it just now on my
Finger, and asked me how I came by it? I told her the whole Story; upon which
out came the Discovery, that Philumena was the Party he made bold with, and
this the Child he got. -- In Troth I Am glad I should be the occasion of so much
Joy to him, though others of my Trade would never have been so; for it never makes
for our Interest to have our Sparks fond of Matrimony: But upon my Honesty, the
smell of a little Pelf shall never make me to do a base thing. Indeed, I had a
very free, joll^, pleasant Spark of him, whilst it was allowable; and this
Match happened ill for me, I must needs say: But my comfort is, I Have done
nothing, that I know of, to deserve so great a Misfortune* It Is but Justice to
bear some Inconveniences from him, that has been so good a Friend to me


Pamphilus and Parmeno at a distance.


Parmeno, have a care you give a clear and evident Proof of this Business; and
that you don't, only for a moment, make me believe my self extremely happy


That Care's over.


For certain?


Yes, for certain.


I Am in Heaven if it be so.


You^ll find it so, I Will warrant ye.


Prithee, not so fast. -- I Am afraid you tell me one thing, and I think it is
another


Well, Sir.


I think you told me that my Mother Myrrhina discovered her own Ring upon
Bacchis's Finger --


Right.


-- And the very same I formerly presented to her; and 'twas she bad ye run,
and tell me on it* Was Not it


Yes, she did.


Who alive then is a happier and finer Fellow than I? what reward must I bestow
on thee for this kind Message? what shall I? what? ^ cannot imagine


But I can, Sir.


Prithee what?


Just nothing at all: For I cannot see any thing either in the Message or
Messenger that will turn to your Advantage


Shall I suffer thee to go unrewarded, that have rescued me from the Jaws of
Death, and brought me to Life again? Surely thou can not think me so
ungrateful. -- But hold! there walks Bacchis before their Door, waiting for me
I fancy. -- I Will go to her




Mr. Pamphilus, your Servant.


Bacchis! My sweet Bacchis! Thou have made me my Dear!


There Is good News for you, Sir, and I Am heartily glad on it.


Your Actions speak it. -- I see you are still Mistress of your old pleasant
way, so that your Presence, Discourse, and Conversation will always be
charming, wheree're you g


And you, Sir, as I hope for Mercy, are still Master of your old sweet Temper,
and pleasant Humor: The World cannot show a more accomplished Gentleman than
you, Mr. Pamphilus


Ha -- Ha -- He -- This to me Bacchis?


You have made an excellent choice of a Wife, Mr. Pamphilus; I never, that I
know of, saw her till now: I^vow, she is a lovely Creature


Are ye in earnest?


Let me perish, Sir, if I ben't.


But pray did ye tell my Father any thing of this business.


Not a word.


Nor need ye, not so much as a Syllable: I don't desire this should prove like
a Comedy' where the whole Plot is discovered to every Body. Here only those
that should, know all; but those that should not, know nothing, but shall ^ lll
be in the dark


Nay more, I Will give a further Argument how easy it is to conceal it, for Madam
Myrrhina told her Husband, she was satisfied with my Depositions, and believed
You innocent


Best of all: I hope all things will succeed according to our wishes

Par. comes behind and plucks his master.) Pray, Sir, may not I know what good
Office I Have done ye to day? and what you two are debating upon


No Sirrah


But I guess tho. -- I rescue him from the Jaws of Death? How did I do that?


Little do thou think, Parmeno, what a piece of Service thou'st done me to
day; and from what Troubles thou have freed me


Your Pardon for that, Sir, I know it well enough, and did it on purpose.


So I fancy.


Do You think poor Parmeno shall let a day go over his Head without obliging his
Friends


Come on then honest Parmeno.


I Will follow ye, Sir



By my Soul, Gentlemen, I Have done more good to day, without knowing it, than
ever I did designedly in all my Life. -- I hope we have pleased ye.



