THE BROTHERS. A COMEDY, Acted at the Funeral-Games of L. Emilius Paulus. WHEN
Q. Fabius Maximus, and P. Cornelius the African were Curule Edil's, By the
Company of L. Attilius of Preneste, and Minucius Protimus

Flaccu's made free by Claudius, Composed the Mu^^^, which was performed on
Tyrian FLUTES

It was taken from the GREEK of Menander;

And ACTED Under the Consulship of L. Anicius, and M. Cornelius.

A. U. C. 583. Ante Christ 168.

Scene, ATHENS.

TIME, about Eight or Nine Hours

The Street before s Door. Betimes in the Morning. Storax, I say! --


Eschine since last Night's Entertainment, nor of any of the Servants that went
to bring him home. -- Well, it is true, as they say, if a Man be but out of the
way, or outstays his time a little, he is less concerned at the Scolding and
Suspicions of a jealous Wife, than a fond Parent is for a Child upon the like
occasion For she, if you don't come in at your Hour, takes it for granted, that
you have picked up a Girl, or a Girl you; or else that you're at the Tavern, or
some other place of Diversion, or so; however that you fare well, whatever
becomes of the poor Soul at home. But for me now, what a World of Thoughts,
and what a rabble of Whimsies have I in my Head, for this Boys lying out last
Night? Lest he should be starved with Cold, ^^mbl'd into a Cellar, or have broke
a Leg or an Arm. -- Lord! That a Man should set his Heart upon any thing, and
make it dearer to him than himself. And upon the whole Matter, this Boy is none
of my Son neither, but my Brother's, who is of a quite different Humor from
me. For my part, I always chose the quiet Life of the Town, to live at ease,
and (what the Wits count a Happiness) have never been troubled with a Wife. But
my Brother of the other hand has always lived in the Country, pinching and
taking a world of Pains; committed Matrimony, and was the Father of two Sons:
The Eldest I have adopted, brought up, esteemed and loved as my own; I please
my self in him, the only Creature I dote upon. Then I do all I can ^o make him
think as well of me: I deny him nothing, let him even do what he will himself,
and don't think it fit upon every turn to make use of my Authority. In short, I
have brought him to ^his, that he will conceal none of the Levities of his (...),
which others so industriously hide from their Fathers. For he that will not stick
to falsify to his own Father, or will put upon him, will be ^^ne to make
bolder with other People. It Was always my Opinion, That it is much better to ^eep
Children in order by Shame and Generosity of ^nclination, than by Fear, My
Brother and I cannot agree in this Point, and my way of Breeding will not down with
him. Ever and anon he comes open Mouth to me. -- Why Micio! What do you m^an?
Will ye be the Ruin of our Child? Why does he whore? Why does he drink? Why
do you maintain him in all this? You let him go too fine: You are extremely silly
in it. He Is extremely severe, say I, beyond all Right and Reason: And truly, in
my Mind, that Man is very much out, that believes that Government purely by
force should have more Authority, and a better Foundation, than when it is
accompanied with Tenderness and Respect. This is my Logic, and I argue thus.
He that is compelled by Threats to do his Duty, will be wary no longer than
you have an Eye over him, but when he sees he shall not be found out he will even
follow his own Inclinations. But he that is governed by Love obeys most
cheerfully, strives to make his due returns, and is the same whether you are
present or absent. It Is a Father's part to use his Child so as his own choice
rather than outward constraint, should put him upon doing well. Here lies the
difference between a Father and a Master: and he that does otherwise, let him
own that he understands not at all how to govern Children.




Brother! You are welcome to Town.


Oh! Well met! You're the Man I want.


What makes you so off the Hooks?


Is that a Question for me? when we have got such a hopeful Youth as Eschine?


I said, it would be so.


What has he done? He Is ashamed of nothing, afraid of no body, and looks upon
himself to be a lawless Man. I have nothing to say to old Stories, but what a
prank has he just now played


What Is that I pray?


Why? he has gone and forced open a Man's Door, broke into his House, beat the
Master and and all his Family most barbarously, left 'em for dead, and carried
off a Wench he had a fancy for, by force of Arms. Every body cry d shame on it:
What a world of People told me on it, as I came along! Nay, the whole Town rings
on it. To say no more, if he would but take Example, does he not see how closely
his Brother minds his his business, lives sparingly and soberly in the Country?
He would not do such a thing for the World. But, Brother, in blaming Eschine, I
blame you too, it is you have been the spoiling of him


There Is nothing more unreasonable than a Man unacquainted with the World; that
thinks nothing well done, but what he does himself


Why that pray?


'Cause you take things much otherwise than ye ought. Believe me Brother, it is
no such mighty business for a young Fellow to wench and drink a little: No, nor
^et to break a Door: If you and I were less extravagant, twasn't for want of
Will, but Money: And you count that your Virtue, which is only owing to
Necessity; which is not fairly done. For had we had where-withal, we should have
been as wild as others: And had you but common Sense, you would give that fine
Son of yours the same liberty, whilst he is young: rather than he should, when
your Bones are laid (which he has often prayed for) take the same wild Courses
at an Age, when they will less become him


'Sbud! You're enough to distract one! Then, be like there is no harm in a young
Man to live at this mad rate


Patience, good Brother! Prithee don't deafen my Ears with old Stories. You
gave me your Son, and by Adoption he is mine; if he be extravagant, I shall bear
the blame on it, and pay for it over and above. He treats, he drinks, he dresses!
It Is all at my Charge. He keeps a Miss too! I Will supply his Pocket as long as
I Am able, and when that fails, perhaps they will turn him out. Has he broke any
Doors? They shall be made good. Torn any Clothes? They shall be mended too. I
thank my Stars I Have where-withal to do it, and as yet not uneasy under it. In
short! Either leave off complaining, or choose who you will be judged by: and
I Will make it appear, that you're more to blame than I


Mercy upon me! Learn to be a Father by them that are so indeed.


You are his Father by Nature, but I have the care of him.


Ay, special care!


Nay, if you're at that Sport, I Will be gone.


Will ye so? --


What should I stay for to hear the same thing a thousand times over.


It Is only from my concern for him.


And I Am concerned for him too; but, good Brother, let us each concern our
selves as we ought; you for one, and I for t^other: For you to take care of
both, looks as if you revoked that grant which made him mine


Ah! Brother.


I Will have it thus.


Will ye so? -- Well, if that is your resolution: Let him squander all, damn
all, himself and all, it is all one to me. If ever I^ speak a Syllable more. --


Now you begin to be angry again.


Don't ye think there is reason for it. Do I desire to have your rare Son from ye?
It grieves me, I must confess, for he is my own Flesh and Blood still. If I
oppose, I shall -- But I have done. You Would have me take care of one, and so I
will. Heavens be praised, he proves after my own Heart. Your Profligate will
feel the smart on it at last. -- Well! But I will not be too hard upon him.


I believe part of what he said is true, but not all: And truly I Am a little
moved at it, though I would not show my self concerned before him: For He Is such
a strange Man, that to pacify him you must cr^ss, and out-hector him, though
then he can scarce contain himself. But should I chafe him, and blow the Coal,
I should even be a Madman for Company. Yet I must confess my EschiM has been a
kind of a naughty Boy in this business What Courtesan has not he visited? Or
what pretty Face has not he presented some Toy or other to? In fine, not long
ago (sick I thought of these Creatures) he told me he would take up and marry.
I was in hopes the Heats of his Youth had been abated, and was heartily glad
on it: When on a sudden a new Fires broke out. But I Will know it whatever the
Matter is, and go see whether I can meet with my Gentleman at the Change












I Will have her again, in spite of the World. --


Though he is a very Rascal, yet he shall not provoke me to give him another beating
to day


Hark ye, Sir, that you mightn't pretend to be ignorant of my Profession, I
tell ye I Am a Woman-Merchant


A Cock-Bawd you mean.


And one of the greatest Repute in Town. And don't you fancy now that you shall
get off by saying, 'Twas against my will that you were abused: By the Lord
Harry, I value it not a Straw. Assure your self, I Will trounce ye to some Tune;
your fine Words shall never make amends for the Blows you gave me. I know these
will be your Tricks and Excuses. I Am extremely sorry for it, I Will take my Oath
you did not deserve this usage. When the truth on it is, I Have been used worse
than a Dog





You had as good stay where you are.










Come hither Parmeno. -- You are too far. -- Stand close to that Son of a
Whore. -- So, that is well. Take care to keep your Eye full upon mine, that when
I tip the wink, you may be ready to give him a slap in the Face


I Would fain see that. Eschine gives the Girl to Parmeno, which Sannio seeing,
runs and catches hold of her


Have a care, Parmeno.





Oh, monstrous!


You shall ha the second part of the same Tune, if you have not a care.


Murder! murder!


Sannio!




What do you mean, Sir? Do you reign Lord and Master here?


If I did, I Would reward your Bawdship according to your deserts.


Pray what Authority have you over me?


None perhaps.


How! Do You know who I am, Sir?


Nor yet desire it.


Did I meddle with any thing of yours pra?


If you had, Sirrah, it should have been a dear meddling.


Then how comes it to be more lawful for ^ou to take my Goods, which I honestly
bought and paid for? Answer me that pray


You had not best stand bawling at this rate before the Door; if ye plague us
any more, I Will have ^^ dragged in, and whipped as long as ye can stand


Bless me! Freeborn, and whipped!


That Is your Doom.


Oh the Wickedness of the Man! Is this the eneral Freedom they talk of, with a
Pox


Worthy Mr. Pimp! If your mad Fit's ^ver, hear me a word, if your Honor's so
dis^os'd


Was It I that was mad, or you?


Let that pass, now come to the point.


What point? Whither shall I come?


Will ye give me leave to speak about your ^usiness?


With all my heart, provided it be just.


Heigh toss! The Bawd's turned Puritan, and would teach me Justice.


Though I am a Bawd, the common bane of ^outh, a forsworn Wretch, a public
Nuisance; ^et I never did you any wrong, Sir


That Is kept for an after-clap.


Pray, Mr. Eschine, return to your first ^roposal.


The Girl cost ye about Fifty Guineas, may ^^ never thrive with ye! The Money
shall be paid ^e again


What if I will not part with her, who a plague shall force me? Will you? Esch. No.


I was afraid you would.


Truly, Friend Sannio, between you and ^^, she is not to be sold at all; for
she is a Gentlewoman, and so I Will prove her to be. Now, Block^ead, choose
whether you will take the Money, or try it out at Law. -- Chew upon this, till
co^ back, worthy Mr. Pimpwell.


vi armis, and given poor Sanny above Five hund^ Bastinadoes. After this sweet
usage he would have surrender up my Right and Title to her without Interest. Faith
he shall have her indeed, since deserves her so well, and requires nothing ^^
what is just. -- Come again an hour hence, to Morrow. The I can bear too, so I
may be sure on it at last, the it be some damage to me. -- 'Twill be so, sure as
a Gun. Since Friend Sanny thou have take up such a nasty Trade, thou must be
content bear and Pocket up the Affronts of such hectori^ Gallants. But since no
body's here to pay ^^ I do reckon my Chickens before they are ha^^




Sannio? I hear my Master and you have have kind of a Scuffle.





You may thank your self for it.


How could I help it?


You should ha'born with the young Genman's Humor a little.


What could I do more? I Am sure I bore the blows upon my Face, he was pleased
to ^e m


Well, dye know what I Am going to say? balk an Ace sometimes is the best play.


Heigh ho!


You are so timorous like a senseless Sot: ^^w if you had parted with a little
of your Right, ^^ humored the Gentleman, you would have got the ^vil and all at the
long run


I don't love to buy a Pig in a Bag.


Ah, thou will never be worth any thing. ^^t upon ye, as if you had not a Spring
to catch ^oodcocks


I believe that might be the best way, but ^ad never the Grace to follow it,
nor to refuse ^^ Ready, when I could get it


Go to, I know your generous Spirit: As ^ugh you regarded half a hundred
Gu^nea's, so ^^ could serve my Master b^^: Besides they say, ^u re making a
Voyage to Cyprus


Oh!


And have bought up several Commodities Transport thither; the Vessel's hi^ed:
I know ^ur Mind's a little wavering about this Money, ^^en you come back I hope
to see an end of the ^^iness


I Have no Voyage to make. -- Faith I Am adone! It Is upon this they have built
their Plot


The Fellows upon the fret, I Have put a Flea ^ his ^ar.


carry to Cyprus. If I lose my Fair it will have break me: And if I leave this
business at six an^ sevens, the time will be over when I come back. There'll be
no Remedy, and I shall have a plagu^ cold Welcome. Are you come now, they will
say, ^^ prosecute? Why did ye let it run so long? Where h^^ ye been all this
while? So that I had better lo^ every cross on it, than tarry so long before I
su^ for it





Is this like a Gentleman? Is this Mr. Es^^chine's Conscience to take away a
Girl by mai^ force





Oh miserable! Now poor I am in dange^ of losing part of the very Principal. Is
he pa^^ all shame? He has beat all my Teeth down my Throat; and my Head into an
an entire Gelly^ Then he would trick me of the Money into the Bargain. -- I have no
Voyage to make


That Is as you please. -- Have ye any further Commands. -- I Am going.


Ay, pray good Mr. Syrus, however things have been, rather than sue and quarrel,
let him pa^ me my own: at least what she cost me. I know^ ye little Rogue, you
never had occasion, as yet^ to make use of me as a Friend: But if you shou'd^
you will say I Am no forgetful or ungrateful Person


I Will do my best. -- Oh, yonder come^ Ctesipho, I faith as brisk as as a
Body-louse for hi^ Mistress


Well, will ye do as I desired ye?


Have a little Patience.







Oh Mr. Ctesipho!


Dear Rogue Syrus, where is my Brother?


Look ye, he is at home waiting for ye.


Oh brave!


What Is the Matetr, Sir?


The Matter old Boy? I should have been cold in my Grave, but for his means. --
Ah, he is an honest Soul! he neglected his own Interest to serve mine. He has
taken upon himself all the Curses, Scandals, Love-Matters and Miscarriages that
belong to me; And what could he do more? But who comes there? What makes the
Door go


Stay, stay, here he comes himself.




Where Is the Scoundrel Son of a Whore?


Does he want me? Has he got any Money? I Am broke: the Devil a Penny do I see.


Hah! This is lucky, 'twas you I was wishing for -- Well, how is it? All Is well;
off with that sour Look


Now I have reason, having such a Brother as you O Eschine! My true Brother
indeed! I dare not praise ye any more before your Face, lest you should think
it proceeded rather from Flattery than Gratitude


Leave your fooling, as though we were mere Strangers to one another: But this
troubles me that we could not know of the business sooner; for the Matter was
come to that pass; that all the World could scarce have helped you, though they
had desired it. Ctes. Modesty hindered me


Pshaw! 'twas folly, notmodesty. What! to be upon running your Country for so
small a Matter? Fie upon it: Heavens forbid that


'Twasn't well I own.


Sannio concluded on? Sir. He Is grown very tame.


I Will to the Piazza and discharge him. -- but do you brother step in to your
Mistress


Good Mr. Syrus, push on the business.


Let Us be quick, Sir. For the Man's in haste for Cyprus.


I Am in no such haste. -- I Have nothing to do, but to wait for the Money.


You shall have it man, nver fear't.


What all?


Yes all. Say no more about it but follow us. San. So I will.




Syrus.


Well, Sir your pleasure.


Prithee see that paltry Rascal dispatched as soon as possible, lest upon
farther provocation the business come to my Father's Ears; then I shall be
ruined to all Intents and Purposes


That shall not be: Take Heart Sir. Do you toy away half an hour or so with your
Mist^ess, the mean time within. Order the Butler to lay the Cloth, and all
things to be got ready. As soon as the business is over, I Will march home with
plenty of Provisions


Prithee do: and since things have fallen out so luckily, let us even make a day
on it


PRithee my good Nurse, how is she like to do?


How! Troth I hope she will have a good time on it. Her Pains, my good Mistress,
are just beginning: You're as fearful now, as if y' had never been at a Labor,
nor cried out your self


Alas-a-day! I Have no body at home: and we are all alone. Our Man Geta's out
of the way too; and there is never a Soul to send for the Midwife, or to call
Eschine


Without doubt, Eschine will be here anon: never a day goes over his Head, but
we have his Company


He Is the only Comfort I have in my Affliction.


As the Case stands, Mistress, the business could not fall into better hands:
since she had the mischance by such a Gentleman, of such a Parentage, so
generous, and so nobly descended


You're much in the right: Heavens keep him ours for ever.




to find out a remedy for this mischief that has happened to my self, my
Mistress and her Daughter, they could do us no good. -- Oh miserable! Such a
Flood of Difficulties over whelm us, that it is impossible to keep above water.
Ravishment, Poverty, Oppression, Desertion, Infamy. -- Is the Age so debauched?
-- Abominable Villains! Cursed Wretches! This Devil of a Man. --


Bless me! What makes our Geta in such a Fright, and in such haste?





I cannot well understand what the Fellow says.


Pray, Mistress, let us go a little nigher to him.


Geta! I Am scarce Compos mentis, my Passion has inflamed me. I Would desire nothing
more than to meet the whole Family of em, that I might disgorge my rage upon
em, now my Blood's up. I Would be contented to suffer any thing, so I might have a
swinging Revenge upon em. First, I Would tread out that stinking Snuff his Father,
that gave being to the vise Rascal. Then for that Dog Syrus, that put him
upon it. -- How I Would tear him piecemeal! I Would give him such a toss, dash his
Skull against the Stones, and strew the Streets with his Brains. That Boy
Eschine too, I Would tear out his Eyes, and after that break his ^eck. -- The rest
I Would down with em, drive em, drag em, pound 'em, and trample em under m^ Feet.
But what makes me loiter, when I should ^e telling this damned News to my
Mistress.


Let Us call him back. -- Why, Geta!


Pish, prithee don't trouble me, whosoever you are.


It Is your Mistress calls.


Ay, where is she? --


What Is the Matter? Why do pant so?


Oh!


Why in such haste my poor Boy? Come take Breath. --


We are absolutely --


What absolutely?


-- Undone -- past all recovery. --


For Heavens sake, what is the Matter?


Just now. --


What just now, Geta? --


This Mr. Eschine. --


What of him?


-- Has quite -- thrown off our Family.


Alas! Undone indeed! But how so?


He Is run mad after another Face.


Wretch that I am!


He didn't do things in the dark, but forced her from a Bawd in the Eyes of the
World


Are you sure of this?


Most sure, these very Eyes saw it.


Sostrata! what can thou trust to? Or whom can thou trust? Our dear Eschine
do this; The very Soul of us all; in whom we placed our Hopes and Happiness?
How often he swore he would not live a day without his Pamphila? And said, he would
put the Infant on his Father's Knees, and in that sort beg his leave to marry
her


Pray, Mistress, forbear weeping, but rather consider what is fit to be done:
whether we should put up the Affront, or tell it to a Friend


Hold, hold Man; Have lost thy Senses? Do You think this a business fit to be
blazed abroad


Nay, I Am for hushing of it against the World. First, The Case is plain, he has
left us for good and all: Now if we make it public, ten to one but he will
disown it, then your Reputation, and your Daughter's Honor will be called in
question. But put the Case he confesses all, 'twou'dn't be Prudence to give
him your Daughter, whilst he keeps another: Therefore take the thing which way
you please, Concealment is my Opinion


Ah, by no means: I Will not agree to^t.


What will ye do then?


Divulge it.


How! Have a special care, Mistress, what you do.


The Case can never be worse than it is; For first, she has no Portion; then
she is robbed of that which might have went instead of one; so that she cannot be
put off for a Maid. I have one shift left, if he deny't, the Ring he lost is
proof enough. In fine, since my own Conscience tells me, that this mishap cannot
be charged either to my Covetousness, or to any base Ends that I or my Daughter
had in it, we'll even venture a Trial at Law


Do You think so? Pray, think on it again.


Do you, Geta, make all the haste you can to her Cousin Hegeos, and tell him
the whole Story: for he was a choice Friend of my poor Husbands, and had always
a great kindness for our Family


Ay faith, there is no body else looks upon us.


Good Canthara, do you run, and call the Mi^wife, that she may be in the way if
need be. exeunt severally




Undone, undone! They say my Boy Ctesipho made one with his Brother at the
Rape: That he should be able to debauch a Lad of his Sobriety is the only thing
that could add to my Misfortunes. -- Where shall I search for him? I Am afraid
they have carried him to some Bawdyhouse or other. The Rake-hell his Brother has
drawn him in. I Am confident. -- But yonder comes Syrus, I Will learn of him where
he is. But in faith he is one of their gang, and if he perceives I want him, the
Rogue will never tell me any thing; therefore he shall not know my design













I cannot hold any longer.





Hah! If you would have any thing done as it should be, commend me to this
Gentleman.


Demea, I didn't see ye. How does your Worship?


How? -- I cannot but wonder at your fine way of living.


Faith, Sir, it is pretty Silly, and, to speak the truth, somewhat oddish --
Dromo, gut and scale the rest of o'th Fish, but the great Conger-Eel let him
play in the Water a little; when I come back, we'll bone him, and not before


Are these scandalous Villainies to be allowed of?


Stephanio, see that the Salt-fish be well watered.


Oh Heavens! Does he do this on purpose, or does he think 'twill be for his
Credit to ruin his Son? What a sad Creature am I! Methinks I have the day
before my Eyes when this Boy will be forced for want of bread to run his
Country, and list himself a Soldier


Oh, Sir! There Is Wisdom now! to see things at a distance, and not only what is
just before ye


Well, have ye got the f^ddling Wench at your House?


She Is there within.


The Devil! surely she is not to dwell there?


I believe, they are mad enough to have it so.


Is It possible?


Ah the foppish Fondness and pernicious easiness of a Father!


In good truth, I Am ashamed, and heartily grieved, for my Brother.


There Is too much; Ay, a great deal too much difference, Sir, between you two
(though I shou'dn't say so much before your Face) you, Sir, as much as there is
o'ye, are Wisdom all over: but he is a mere Gimcrack. Would you have suffered
your Son to have done thus


Suffered him? Zooks! I should have smel^ him out six whole Months, before he
had been concerned in such a business


Ah Sir, you need not tell me what a wary Man you are.


Heavens grant he may continue, as he i^.


Children prove as their Father's make 'em.


But hark ye Syrus, Prithee did see him to day?


Mr. Ctesipho, Sir! (I Will send the old Foo^^ packing into the Country)


Are you sure he is there?


Sure? Why I saw him out o'Town my self.


That Is well. I was afraid he had loiter'd hereabout still.


And was in a plaguey Huff too.


At what prithee?


He fell out with his Brother in the open Market about the Music Wench.


Say you so?


In Faith he spoke his Mind freely; for when we were paying the Money, in drops
he unawares upon the back on's: and sets up an outery; Arn't ye ashamed Brot^er
Eschine to commit such Villainies? That you should dishonor our Family at this
vile rate


E'dad he makes me weep for Joy.


You don't only weaken your Estate, but your Reputation too.


Heavens bless him! I hope he will never^ degenerate.


Who questions it?


O Syrus, he poor Boy has his head full of these Morals.


And well he may, when he has such a Father at home to fill it.


I do my best, and leave no Stone unturn^d, but exercise him in all that is
good. Above all I charge him, Look into Men's Actions as into a Glas^, and take
Example by 'em. Practice this, say I. --


Very well indeed.


Shun that,


Shrew^d.


This is commendable.


There you hit it again.


That will not be allowed at all.


Most admirable.


And moreover. --


Moreovers: I Have got an excellent Dish of Fish to my Tooth, and I must take
special care that the^ ben't spoiled: For that is as scandalous a business
among us, Sir, as the neglect of your Duty is among them. And according to my
Abilities I give my fellow Servants Instructions after the self-same manner.
This is too Salt (Say I^) That Is too much, this is not done cleanly enough;
that is well done, pray remember to do so another time. I instruct 'em
diligently, as well as my Palate will serve me. Last of all too, I bid them 'em
look into their Dishes as into a Glass, and there learn their Duty. I confess
these are all mere Toys: but what signifies that? We must suit our Morals to
the Persons we deal with. -- Please to command me, Sir


Yes, to get a little more Wit among ye.


Do You design for the Country, Sir?


Ay, to rights.


Ay, what should you do here, Sir, where all your good Morals are but thrown
away





Ay, truly, I Will to my Country-Farm, since he that brought me hither is gone
back again. -- That Boy's all my care, he is my true Son; since my Brother will
have his own way, let him look to that Rake-hell. -- But who comes yonder at a
distance? Mr. Hegio, one of our own Ward? -- If my Eyes don't fail me, it is he
indeed. Ah, we have been Cronies from our Cradles. By Jove, such honest Citizens
are very scarce now adays! A Man^ of the right old Stamp for Virtue and
Fidelity, and would not do the Government any harm for the World. How glad am I
to see the remains of the old Stock! Ah, Life is a Pleasure to me now. I Will
wait for him here, and bid him Good Morrow, and have a little discourse with
him




Ye Powers! A dishonorable Action! What is it you say, Geta? Hah!


Just as I told ye.


That ever that Family should be guilty of such an ungenteel thing. Oh,
Eschine! You didn't learn this of your Father, I Am sure





If they will not give satisfaction, they mustn't think to carry it off thus.


We all rely upon you, Sir: We have none else to stand by us: You are our
Guardian, and Father too. The old Gentleman upon his Deathbed bequeathed us all
to your Care, and if you forsake us, we are utterly undone


No more of that: I Will not forsake ye, nor can I do it with a safe Conscience.


I Will to him. -- Honest Hegio, I Am heartily glad to see ye.


Oh! Mr. Demca, I Am your humble Servant, you are the Man I wanted.


How so, Sir?


Why your Eldest Son Eschine, whom your Brother has adopted, has done neither
like an honest Man, nor a Gentleman


What has he done?


You knew one Simulus, a Friend and Cotemporary of ours.


Yes, very well.


Why, he has debauched his Daughter?


Oh!


Hold, Sir, the worst is to come yet.


What more Mischief still?


Yes, truly; for that was, in some measure excusable. He had Opportunity, Heat,
Wine, and Youth to prompt him to it; 'twas but a humane Frailty. But when he was
sensible of his Fault, he comes forthwith to her Mother, weeping, praying,
entreating, promising and swearing he would take her home and marry her: Upon this
all was pardoned, hushed and relied upon. The young Woman proved with Child
upon this; has gone her Forty Weeks. But this sweet Youth is got to a
Ballad-singer, in the Devil's Name, keeps her at his Fathers, and has left the
the other to shift for her self


Is all this true are you sure?


The Mother is ready to prove it, the young Woman and the Business speaks it
self: Besides, here is Geta, as Servants are now, none of the worst, a painful
Fellow, who maintains 'em all, and keeps the whole Family himself; take him,
bind him, force the Truth out of him


Yes, verily Sir, rack me to death, if all ben't true: Besides Mr. Eschine
himself will not deny it, pray, Sir, bring us Face to Face


I Am horribly ashamed, and cannot imagine what to do, or what answer to make him.








Without doubt, Sir.


Ah, Mr. Demea, she calls upon your Honor now; and begs ye to do that freely,
which the Law would else oblige ye to. I beg Heaven to inspire ye to do as you
ought; but if you are otherwise minded, Mr. Demea, I Will maintain her and her
dead Father's Cause to the last Penny in my Purse. He was my Kinsman, we were
bred up Children together, we were together at Wars abroad, and Peace at home,
and together we under-went the straits of Poverty: Therefore I Will about it, do
my utmost, and bring it to a Trial, and rather lose my Life than desert these
poor Women. -- What answer will ye return


I Will go talk with my Brother, Sir; what Advice he gives, that I Will follow.


But, Mr. Demea, do but consider with your self, that the more you live at
Ease, the more Powerful, the more Rich, the more Happy, and the more Noble you
are, so much the more Honest and Just ought you to be, if you would be thought Men
of Honor


Away! No more, you shall have all Right and Justice done you.


Spoken like a worthy Gentleman. -- Geta, bring me to your Mistress.




This was no more than I foretold. I wish to my Soul this was the last mad
Prank! But this allowance of so much Liberty will end at last in so me sad
Story or other. -- Well I Will go hunt for my Brother, and discharge this News in
his very Face.




you can. I Will go discourse Mr. Micio, if he be at the Piazza, and let him know
how the Case stands; if he designs to do us right, well and good; If not, let
him declare it plainly; that I may know how to take my Measures accordingly.





Above an hour ago.


Prithee tell me true.


He Is at his Grainge, slaving himself most horribly by this time, I Will warrant
ye


Faith, if it might not endanger his health, ^^cou'd wish heartily he might be
so miserably tired, as to be laid up these three days


So say I: and a longer time too, if possible.


Ay, ay: for I Would very fain, now I Have begun the day merrily, make an end of it
merrily too* The only Quarrel I have with our Countty-house is, that it is too,
nigh the Town: Were it farther ^ff, before he could get thither and back again,
'^would be Night first. But now when he finds no Ctesipho at home, I Am sure
he will be upo' the spur back again in an instant. Then to Catechis^ng he goes:
Pray where have you been, Sir? What? Cannot a Man have a glimps of ye, in a whole
day's ^ime? What excuse. shall I have


Have not ye got one ready?


The Devil a one have I.


So much the worse: Why if you had but, one of your Domestics, a Friend, or a
guest, that were better than no body yet


I have, what then?


Pretend you had hasty business to dispatch.


What when I had none? -- 'Twon't do.


'Twill tho.


Ay for the day: but if I lie out all Night, what excuse then Syrus?


It Is pity it is not more the Fashion to serve a Friend in the Nights as well
as day. -- But however, set your heart at rest; I know your Father's humor to
a hair. When he rages like a Lion, I can presently make him as quiet as a Lamb


As how, I prithee?


Oh, he is mightily tickled when any body commends you: I make ye a very Saint
before* him, and reckon up all your virtuous Qualities


Mine?


Ay, yours: Then of a sudden the good Man cries like a little Child, for Joy.
-- Look to your self there







Talk of the Devil and his Horns appear*


Is It my Father?


The very same.


Prithee, Syrus, what shall we do now?


Run in quickly, I Will set my Wits to work.


If he ask for me, say you have not seen me, do you hear?


Can ye hold your Tongue?




looking for him, who should I see but a Workman just come from my
Country House, and says my Boy is not there neither. Nor can I tell for my Life
what course to steer


Syrus!


What say ye?


Does he enquire for me?


Yes, Faith.


I Am undone.


Come, don't be discouraged.





Faith I cannot but laugh at him, to hear him say, that he is the first that
knows every thing, when he is the only Man that knows nothing.





Prithee, good Syrus, take care he don't break in upon us unawares.


Peace I say, I Will take care about it.


Faith, Sir, but I shall not trust my Concerns in your hands to day: For I Will
secure my Girl and my self in some by Closet or other; E'dad that will be the
surest way by half.


Away! I Will clear the Coast of him in a trice


Oh, there is the Hell-hound, Syrus.





What a yelping this Cur makes? What does he ail? -- What say you honest Man?
Is my Brother at home? Hah


Pox o'your honest Men, I Am a dead Man.


What Is the Matter?


The Matter with a plague? Your sober stayed Son Ctesipho has almost beaten
poor me and the Music Girl to death


What Is that you say? Hah!


See how he has slit my Lip up to my Nose.


How comes this to pass?


He says, I was the occasion of the buying of her.


Didn't you just now tell me, he was gone into the Country, and you brought him
part of the way


True, Sir. But after that he came raving like a Madman, sparing never a
Mothers Son of us. He might have been ashamed to fall upon the Bones of a poor
old Man, who the other day dandled him in my Arms, when he was no higher than
this.


Ha -- ha -- he -- God-a-mercy Ctesipho: Old Demea right. Well! you are a Man
every Inch of thee


Do You commend him? but in faith he had best keep his flippant Fingers to himself
another time, if he understands himself


It Is bravely done!


Very bravely indeed! To Cock-crow over a silly Woman, and a poor Servant, that
daren't hold up a Finger against him? -- Yes, 'twas wonderful brave in faith


He could not have done better. He Is of my Opinion in thinking you to be the
Ringleader of this Roguery. -- But is my Brother within


No, he is abroad.


I Am thinking where a-duce I may look for him.


I know where he is gone, but shall not tell till to Morrow.


What Is that you say, Sirrah? hah!


Just so, Sir.


I Will crack your Skull presently ye Dog.





Then tell me the place, Sirrah.





Well, what then?





VVhereabouts is that?


There, where the great wild Fig Tree stands, do you know it, Sir?


I do.


Keep directly through that.


But that narrow Lane is no Thorow-fare.


Ud^s my Life it is true: I see I Am a silly Block-head, I was out. You must come
back again to the great Protico: E^dad here is a nigher way, and easier to hit
on. Do You know my Lord Cratine's great house


Yes.


When you are past that, turn to the Lefthand down the same Street: and when
you're come to the Temple turn to the Right Hand: before you come to the Cit^
Gates hard by the H^rsepond, there is a certain Mill, right over against that is
a Joyner's Shop, and there you will find the G^ntleman


What business has he there?


To speak for little Oaken-ledg'd Tables to set in the Sun. --


For your Worships to drink about -- Fine work I faith. But why amn't I gone
to him




Go thy ways for a Fool: I Will work thee off thy Stumps, as thou deservest, thou
old doting Chu^l. -- But Mr. Eschine sta^s a bloody while: Dinner will be quite
spoiled: As for C^^sipho hes wholly taken up with his Mistress: but I^^^ take
care of my own sweet Corpse; and will pi^^ out all the good Bits I can f^^d,
take off my Cups of my leisure, and so make the day as long as I can.




Hegio, I can see nothing in the whole business that deserves such mighty
Commendations. I discharge but my Duty, and give satisfaction for the Faults of
my own house: Perhaps you took me to be one of those Men that think they
receive an Injury when they do it themselves, and so call Whore first: Now
'cause I didn't serve you so, do you think your self obliged to me for it


Far be it from me! I never imagined ye to be otherwise than I really find ye:
but let me engage ye so far as to step over with me to the Girl's Mother; and
tell her the very same you told me: that their Jealousy was false grounded,
and that he took away the Music Girl for his Brother


If you think it convenient and necessary let us be going.


You do well, Sir! For you will lighten the poor creature's heart that is ready to
sink with Grief and Vexation, and keep up the character of a worthy Gentlemen.
But, Sir, if you don't think it so proper, I Will tell her what you say my self


No, no, I Will go with ye.


You oblige me, Sir: For howsoever it comes about, all that are a little down
in the world are very suspicious; take every thing at the worst hand, and fancy
themselves slighted, cause of their Misfortunes: Therefore twill give great
satisfaction to clear Mr. Eschine your self


You say nothing but what is tru^e and reasonable.


Be pleased, Sir, to come this way.


I will.




Sostrata believes I bought the M^sick Girl for my self: Old Canthara gave me
to understand as much. For by chance I saw her as she was going for the
Midwife, I presently made up to her, and asked her how my dear Pamphila did,
whether she was near her time; and whether she was then going for the Midwife?
She presently let fly upon me. Away, away Mr. Eschine; you have befooled us long
enough, you have cajoled us sufficiently with your fine Promises. Alack-a-day
(said I) prithee what do mean? You may go now (continued she) and take up
with the Girl you are so enamored with. I immediately perceived their
Jealousy: But yet I kept my Tongue between my Teeth, that I might not blab out
any of my Brother's Secrets to that tattling Gypsy, to have it ^laz'd about
the Town in an instant -- But what shall I do now? Shall I go and say she is my
Brother's? A thing that ought not ought not to be revealed for the World. --
Well! Let that pass, perhaps they will not discover it. Then I am afraid they wont
take things as they are, there are so many Probabilities against me. It Was I,u
self that took her away, I my self that paid the Money for her, and it was I that
furnished her with Lodgings. I must own the Fault of all this lies at my door:
For not telling my Father how Cases stood between me and my Mistress; and not
begging his Consent to take her home and marry her. We^ve been in a dead sleep
till now, but now Eschine rouse thy self up. First of all I Will go to'em and
clear my self. -- I Will up to the Door strait. Eschine; some body open the Door
quickly. -- But, have! I cannot imagine who comes out there? -- I Will step a one
side


Sostrata, I Will find out Efchine to acquaiut him how Matters are carried on. --
But where is he that knocked at the Door


God's Death! My Father's Voice! I Am at a cursed Nonplus.


Eschine.


What business has he here?


Wast you that knocked at the door? -- He Is mute: Suppose I should banter with
him a little, I believe 'twou'dn't be amiss, since he would never trust me with
this Secret. --


What cannot ye speak?


I didn't knock as I know of.


Indeed? Nay, I wondered what business should bring you hither. He blushes:
that is sign good enough


Good, Sir, (if I may be so bold) what business had you at that House?


None of my own. A Friend of mine brought me from the Change to be his
Spokesman in a Concern of his


What was the Concern, Sir?


^^l tell ye: In this House dwells an ordinary Woman or two; which I suppose
^^u don't know, ^^, I Am sure you don't; for they have not lived long in these
parts


Well, Sir, and what then?


Here Is an old Woman and her Daughter. --


So, Sir.


-- The Daughter has buried her Father: Now this Friend of mine is the nearest
Relation, and by Law is forced to marry her himself


Undone!





Nothing, very well. -- Proceed, Sir.


You must know he is just now come to take her away with him: For he dwells at
Miletus


How! To take the Girl away with him?


Yes.


What as far as Miletus, pray Sir?


Ay.





What should they, think ye? Even just nothing: Only the Mother pretends her
Daughter has a Child by another Man (I cannot tell who, for she named him not)
that he was the first comer, therefore the Kinsman must go without her


So, Sir: And was not that a sufficient Demurrer?


No, indeed.


Why so, I beseech ye? Will he take her away in good earnest?


Ay, why shou'dn't he?


Indeed, Sir, this was extreme severe and cruel, (if I might take the Liberty)
I might say ungenreely done


How so?


How so? What do you think will become of the poor young Man her first Lover (who
for ought you know loves her most desperately) when he shall see her ravished
before his Face, and hurried away from his sight for ever? Oh, 'twas a very
dishonorable thing of you, Sir


Why do you talk at this rate? Whose Promise had he? Or whose Consent? When, and
how were they married? Pray who is the Man? What made him encroach upon another
Man's Right


Was it fit for a Girl of her age to sit cross-legg'd at home waiting for a
Kinsman's coming the Lord knows when? Indeed, dear Father, you ought in Justice
to have alleged that, and ha defended it


Very good! Should I have pleaded against my own Client? -- but prithee Boy,
what is all this to us? Or what have we to do with them? -- Come let us be going
-- How now Boy! why in tears tho?


Hear me one word, Sir, I beseech ye.


Poor Boy! I Have heard and know all: For loving thee I could not but be concerned
in whatever thou do


Dear Sir! I Would fain deserve your Love as long as you live. This Fault grieves
me to the Soul; and I Am quite ashamed to look you in the Face


I believe it sincerely: For I well know thy generous Temper: but I Am afraid
you don't mind your own Concerns. What kind of Government is it that you think
you live in? Thou have debauched a Girl, whom by Law thou ought not to have
touched; that is a great Fault, and though very great it is but a common failing:
Others have done it often, and Men of Repute too. But when that was done, tell
me, did you take the least care about it? Or did you forecast in such a case
what should have been done? Or how it should have been done? And if thou had
been ashamed to tell it me, could not I have know on it by others? In this you
were in doubt of for ten Months together: So you have betrayed your self, the
poor young Woman, and your own Child too, as much as you were able. What? Do You
think that the God's should do your work for ye, and you sleep the while? Must
she be brought to your Bedside, as if she were not worth the fetching? I wou
dn't have thee so miserably careless in other things for the World. -- Come
don't be cast down however, thou shall marry her


How?


Don't be cast down, I say.


Pray, Sir, are ye in earnest?


In earnest: Why not?


That I cannot tell, unless it is 'cause the more passionately I desire to have
it so, the more I Am afraid it will not be so


Get thee home, and say your Prayers, and then send for your Wife, go, get thee
gone


What send for her presently?


Yes, presently.


What presently?


Presently, as soon as possible.


Let me never see good day, Sir, if I don't love ye better than my very Eyes.


Than your Mistress too?


Full as well.


That Is much, indeed.


But what is become of the Miletian Spark?


He Is vanished, shipped off, and cast away by this time. -- But why don't ye go,
I say to your Prayers


It would be better for you to do that, S^ir. I Am sure your Prayers will be
heard sooner than mine, since you are the better Man of the two


I Will in, and take care of what is wanting. Do as I bid thee, if thou know^st
what is best for thy self.


What Happiness is this? would any one think he is my Father, or I his Son? If
he had been a Friend or a Brother could he have been more kind or obliging!
Ought I not to love him? To wear him next my Heart? His wonderful Complaisance
has obliged me to be so cautious, as imprudently to do nothing that may
displease him; wherefore I Will now be always upo' my Guard. -- But why don't I
go in, that I may not defer my Marriage!


I Am quite foundered with trotting up and down. -- A plague confound thee,
Syrus, for thy damned Directions. -- I Have hobbl'd over the whole Town, been at
the Gate, at the Horse-pond, and where not? The Devil a Joyner's Shop could I
find; or any Soul that so much as saw my Brother. -- But now, I Am resolved I
will not stir a step out of his House, till he comes back







Oh, here he comes. -- I Have been looking for you these two hours.


What Is the business now?


I Have fresh News to tell ye: horrid Villainies of that fine Son of yours.


Look ye now.


New Villainies, damnable Villainies!


Prithee no more.


Ah, you don't know what a fine Blade he is.


But I do.


Poor Simpleton! I warrant thou dreamest I Am about the Singing-wench: No, the
Rascal has debauched a Citizen's Daughter


That I know too.


Bless me! Do You know it and suffer it too?


Ah, why shou'dn't I?


What? Methinks you should bellow and run mad at it.


No: But I could wish it otherwise.


He has got a Bastard too.


Heavens bless it, say I.


And the Woman's not worth a Groat.


So they say.


And shall he be married to a Beggar?


Yea verily.


Well, and what is to be done next pray?


Why even what should be done next, have the young Woman brought home.


Monstrous! And will ye suffer't?


How can I avoid it?


Avoid it? Why, if you were not really concerned at it, 'twou'd become ye to
seem so however


I Have given consent already: The business is concluded on: The Wedding's as
good as over: Every thing is secure, and I think this becomes me better


Then this Adventure pleases you wonderfully?


No, if I knew how to help it: since I cannot, I must bear't patiently. Man's
Life is like a Game at Tables, if you miss the Cast you have most need of, you
must correct that by Skill which fell out by chance


Your Servant, Mr. Corrector! Your Skill as you call it has fooled away Fifty
Guinea's upon a Ballad-singer; who in three or four days time must be packed
off; if not for a Piece of Money, at any rate


There Is no body to buy her, nor do I design to sell her.


What a-duce will ye do with her then?


Why keep her at home.


Mercy upon my Soul^l A Whore and a Wife under the same Roof?


Why not, prithee?


And you are sure you arn't mad?


Yes, indeed.


Let me die, if e're I saw the like Folly^ In Faith I believe thou thy self have
a mind to have a me^ry strain with her now and then


Why shou'dn't I?


And the Bride, will not she be for learning the same Tune too?


No doubt on it.


And thou pretty Child wilt hobble out the Hay amongst 'em too?


Like enough.


Like enough with a Pox?


And rather than fail, Brother, thou shall make one of the Company.


S^death! Are ye past all shame?


Prithee, Brother, throw off this sullen Humor of thine, and like a civil
Person be free and merry at your Son's Wedding. -- I Will just step and speak a
word at that House, and then I Will come back again.


Here Is a sweet Life! Here are fine Morals! Here Is mad work with a witness! --
Let me see, a Wife not worth a Groat; a Ballad-singer under the same Roof:
Every thing running to riot in the House: A profligate young Rogue, and a
doting old Sot into the Bargain: Why Providence it self, if it should go about
it, would never be able to save this Family




Sy, thou have junketted thy pretty self deliciously, and played thy part very
sumptuously. Go thy ways for a Wag. --


There goes a rare Model of their Education.


Oh here is our old Stingo in faith -- How is^t old Gentleman? Why so alamort?


Oh damned Rascal.


How now old Wisdom, are you come to vent more Morals here?


Would I were thy Master, --


E'gad you would be the richest Man under the ^^n, and your Estate would be
improved to a Miracle


I Would make thee an Example to all Rogues.


Why so? What have I done?


Done, Rascal? In the heat of a disturbance, and in the midst of a most horrid
crime, scarce yet ^^tled, you have got drunk ye Swine, as if all were ^ell and
over


Faith, would I had kept my Post.




Do You hear Syrus? Mr. Ctesipho would pray ye to come to him.


Away with a Pox.


What Is that he said of Ctesipho?


Nothing, Sir.


How ye Goal-bird! Is Ctesipho nested there^


No, Sir; no.


How came the Boy to name him then?


That Is another of the Name, a young Smell feast; do you know him?


I will know presently.





Dog, let me go.


I say, don't go.


Hands off ye Hell-hound; or by Heavens I Will brain ye.


The Devil go with him: I Will be sworn he will be no welcome Reveller to any of
them, especially to poor Ctesipho. -- Zookers! where shall I bestow my self? --
The time this plaguey Storm is blowing over, I Will even slink into some
by-corner, and there sleep out this Dose of Tipple. I think that will be best.












Here Is a Man for ye! He has smelt out the Intrigue, and that makes him bellow
so. -- It Is so, I must expect a smart brush: But the Boys must be helped.


Oh here comes the common Bane and Ruin of our Children.


Pray Brother moderate your passion, and be a little cool.


Well, I am moderate; I am cool. -- I Will not give ye an ill word. Let Us reason
the case calmly -- Was Not it a plain Bargain between us (and that of your own
proposing too) that you should have nothing to do with my Son, nor I with ye^rs?
Answer me directly now


True; I don't deny it.


What makes him a guzzling at your Hou^e then? Why do you entertain my Child? Why
(...) procure him a Wench, Brother? Is there not the ^^me reason for you to
deal as fairly by me, as I do by you? Since I neither meddle nor make with your
Son, methinks you shou'dn't with mine


There Is no reason for that: None at all. The old Proverb says, Among Friends
all things are common


Very pretty I faith! Are you come to talk at that rate at last?


Good Brother, hear me a word if it be'nt too great trouble to ye. First of
all, if your Son's Charges are such a woeful burden to ye, pray consider a
little with your self, that formerly you maintained both of 'em according as
your Estate would bear it; and thought it then sufficient for both; looking
upon me as likel^ enough to marry: Why even follow that old course still,
^^ard, scrape, pinch, do all you can to raise their Fortunes, and take the
credit of it to your self. But then let the poor Rogues make use of my Purse
freely, since that comes to 'em over and ^^^ve -- 'T will not diminith one Furrow
of ^^^ Land, and what they have from me, you may look upon as clear Gains. Now,
Brother, if you do but impartially weigh all this, you would ease m^ ^our self, and
the poor Boys, of a world of tr^^^


I don't (...) Money, it is their Morals --


Hol^, (...). That Is it I was going upon Many (...) may be made, Brother, upon
(...) same thing; by which a Man ma concl^^^, (...) be the ruin of the one,
and no great hur^ to the (...): Not that there is any difference in the thing,
(...) the Persons that did it. Truly, by what I (...) the Boys, I Am confident
they will prove to our (...) desire: I find they have Wit, Discretion, and
Modesty enough upon occasion, and love one another entirely: so that it is easy
to perceive the^^ gen^rous Nature and Spirit: You may reclaim 'em when you
please: But perhaps you are afraid they aren't Husbands good enough. Ah,
Brother, Age has always this ill Property with it; as i^ makes us wiser, so it
makes us more worldly: And that will sufficiently incite 'em to be good
Husbands


Have a care Brother, these your fine Reasonings and gentle Nature don't ruin
us all


Peace, never fear that: Lay aside this Disease, and be ruled by me to day: --
Come, (...) up your countenance





At Midnight if you please, so you be but merry to day.


-- And take that singing Wench along with me too.


Best of all; by that means you will keep (...) Son from rambling: Only take care
she don't (...) ye the slip


I Will warrant^ye. -- And then between the Oven and the Mill, I Will so besmear
her with Cinders, Smoke and Meal. -- Besides in the heat of the day, I Will send
her to rake up Stubble till she be Sunburned, and as black as a Coal


That Is excellent: Now methinks you have some Prudence in ye; and whilst she is
in this cursed pickle, make your Son lie with her Nolens-Volens


Do You rally? well, you are a happy Man, to bear things so well, for m^ part I
must --





I ha done, I ha done.


Pray walk in then, and since the Day's designed for Mirth, let us as merrily
spend it




Never did Man cast up the business of his Life so exactly; but still
Experience, Years and Custom will bring in some new particulars that he was not
aware of, and show his Ignorance of what he thought he knew, and after trial
make him reject his former Opinions. This is plainly my case at present; for
since my G^ass is almost out, I renounce this rigid Life I have always led. But
why so? Because Experience s^^ws me there is nothing like gentleness and good
nature: And this truth appears plainly to all that know me and my Brother. He
always spent ^^s time in Ease and P^^^sure; always courteous, complaisant,
speaking ill of no Man, but caressed all: lived as he plea^'d, spent as he
thought sit, the World bless him, and love him too: But I, that rustic, rigid,
mor^se, pinching, brutish, griping Fellow, must need marry; and how have I
smarted for it! I had C^^^dren too, those were new Troubles: And truly, in
raising up their Fortunes, I Have worn out my Li^e and best Days; and now I Am
just a marching ^^ the Stage, the Fruit of all my Labor is to be ^^ted like a
Toad. But my Brother enjoys all (...) Pleasures of a Father without the
drudgery; they love him, and fly me like the Plague. Him (...) trust with all
their Secrets, dote upon him, l^^e with him, but me they slight: They both pray
(...) his Life, but long for my Death: Those I have brought up with the
greatest Labor, he has g^^^d with a little Cost; so I take all the Pains, and
he reaps all the Pleasure. -- Well, well, for on^e we'll try what can be done,
whether we can spe^k obligingly, and act the Gentleman too, since my Brother
urges me to^t I Would willingly have my C^^ldren love and respect me too; if Gifts
and Complements will do the Feat, I Will not be behind w^^h best of 'em: but my
Estate must go to wrack: What care I for that, since I Have one Foot in the Grave
already


Do You hear, Sir, my Master desires you would not be out o^th' way.


Who calls there? -- Honest Syrus, I Am glad to see thee: How is it? How goes the
World


Very well, Sir.


Honest Syrus, How is it? How goes the World? They came out plaguily against the
grain. --


I Am very much obliged to you, Sir.


I fack Boy it is true; and thou shall find it so ere long.




Demea. -- Your humble Servant, Sir.


Prithee Lad what may I call thy Name?


Geta, Sir.


Honest Geta, why I look upon thee at present to be worth the weight in Gold;
I Would never desire to be better satisfied in a Servant, than that he should be as
trusty to his Master, as I have found thee to be, Geta. For that reason, when
it lies in my way, I Will do thee a good turn with all my Soul, I fack I will --
I Am acting, Sir Courtly, and I do it rarely methinks.


That Is more your Goodness than my Deserts.


I shall do it by degrees: First of all I Will make these Scoundrels my own





Eschine, Boy, How wags the World?


Hah! Are you here my dear Father?


Ay, in faith Boy, I am thy Father both by Inclination, and by Nature too, and
tender thee more than my Eyes -- But why dostn't thou send for thy sweet Lady


I desire nothing more; I only stay for the City-waits and Singing-men.


Ho, Will thou take an old Fellow's Counsel for once?


Let Us hear't pray, Sir.


Hang your Songsters, your Hubbubs, Flambeaux and Scrapers: And order the great
Stone Wall in the Garden to be pulled down immediately, and convey her home that
way: Run both Houses into one, and bring over the Mother, and her whole Family
to yours


With all my heart. The pleasantest Father in the World!


Babylo tell out half a hundred Guinea's quick. -- But, Syrus, why don't you do
as you are bid


What, Sir?


Break down the Wall. -- And do you Geta go, and bring 'em hither.


Ay, God bless your Worship for being so kind to our poor Family.


It Is no less than you deserve. -- What say^st thou Boy, hah!


I Am of your Opinion, Sir.


It Is forty times better than bringing a Lying-in-Woman along the Streets.


Indeed, Sir! I know nothing like it.


This is my way. -- But here comes my Brother.





Yes, that I do: And in this, and all other things, I Am ready to do what may
conduce to the uniting, serving, helping, and joining both Families together


Pray, Sir, let it be so.


Well, I Have nothing to say against it.


Troth it is no more than we are obliged to. -- For first, she is your Son's
VVife's Mother. --


What then?


A very virtuous and modest Woman. --


So they say indeed.


Pretty well in years. --


She is so.


And past Childbearing, a lonesome Woman, and no body regards her. --


What a-duce would he be at?


-- Therefore you ought to marry her, and you Eschine to do what you can to
bring it about


Who I marry? Them. Yes, you.


I prithee? Them. Yes, you I say.


Po, you do but fool surely.





Dear Father --





It Is in vain to refuse, it cannot be avoided.


Po, you dote surely.


Good Sir! Let me obtain that Favor.


Ar't out of thy Wits, let me alone.


Come, come, hearken to what your Son says for once.


Have not ye played the fool enough yet? Shall I marry at Threescore and Five? And
to an old Woman that is ready to drop into the Grave? This is your wise
Counsel, is it


Pray Sir do, I Have promised it.


You promise with a Mischief! Promise for thy self, Chit.


Fie, fie! What if he had begged a greater thing at your hands?


As if there was any thing greater than this.


Pray grant his Request.


Good Sir, ben't so hard to be entreated.


Po, promise him for once


Will ye never leave baiting me?


Not till I Have prevailed, Sir.


Troth, this is downright forcing a Man.


Come, Micio, be good natured and do it.


Though this be the most damned, foolish, ridiculous Whim, and the most averse to
my Nature that can be; yet since you are so extremely hot upon it, I Will humor
ye for once


This is excellent, I Am obliged to ye beyond measure.


Hegio our poor Kinsman, and nighest Relation; in truth, we ought in Conscience
to do something for him


What pray?


There Is a small piece in the Suburbs, which you Farm out, pray let us give him
that to live on


A small one say ye?


Were it a great one you might give it to him: He has been as good as as
Father to Pamphila: Is a very honest Man, our Kinsman, and you cannot bestow it
better: Besides, Brother, there is a certain Proverb none of my own (I assure
ye) which you so well and wisely made use of: That Age has always that ill
Property of making us more Worldly, as well as more Wise. We should do well to
keep clear of this Scandal. It Is a true Proverb, Brother, and ought to be
regarded


What Is all this? -- Well, let it be so, if he must needs have it so.


Brave Father I vow.


Now you are my true Brother, both in Body and Soul.


I Am glad on it.


I Have stabbed him with his own Weapons ^ sack.







Thou art an honest Lad. -- And of my Conscience I think Syrus deserves his
Freedom


He his Freedom? For what Exploit?


O for a thousand.


O dear Mr. Demea, you are a rare Gentleman, e^dad you are. You know I Have
looked to the young Gentlemen from their very Cradles: I taught em, advised
'em, and instructed 'em all I could possible


Nothing more evident: Nay more than that, he catered for 'em, pimp'd for 'em,
and took ^are of a Debauchee in the Morning for 'em. These are no ordinary
Accomplishments, I can assure ye


Your VVorship's very merry.


Besides he was Adjutant-General in buying this Musick-Girl; 'twas he that
managed the whole Intrigue, and it is nothing but Justice to reward him, that it
may be an Encouragement to others: In short, Eschine desires it too





Yes, if you please, Sir.


Since it is so, come hither Syrus. You Are free.


Demea.


I Am well satisfied. Esch. And I too.


I don't question it, Sir: But I wish heartily my Joy were more complete, that
I might see my poor Spouse Phrygia to be made free too


Troth she is a mighty good Woman.


And the first that gave Teat to your Grandson to day.


Faith, in good earnest, if she were the first, she deserves her Freedom
against the World


What? For that Service only?


Yes, for that: In fine, I Will pay for her Freedom.


God's blessing light upon your Worship, and grant all your wishes.


Syrus, thou have made a good days work on it.


Besides, Brother, 'twou'd be a Deed of Charity to lend him a little Money
beforehand to begin the World withal: I Will engage he will soon pay it again


Not a Souse.


He Is a very honest Fellow, Sir.


Upo' my word I Will pay ye again: Do but trust me.


Pray do, Sir.


I Will consider on it first,


He shall pay ye.





And the pleasantest i^th' World.


What Is the meaning of this Brother? How comes this change of Humor all of a
sudden? What a Fit's here of Squandring and Profusion


I Will tell ye. -- That you may know, Brother, these Sons of yours don't reckon
you a sweetnatur'd and pleasant Man, cause you live as you should, or do what
is just and reasonable, but you fawn, cocker, and give em what they II spend.
Now, Son Eschine, if you are dissatisfied at my course of Life, cause I
would not follow your humor in all things right or wrong; I Will not trouble my
Head any further, squander, buy Misses, and do what you will. But if you would
ha me inform ye, and set ye right, and upon occasion serve ye too, in some
things which by reason of your Youth you understand but little, are over fond
of, and don't much consider of, see here I Am ready to do it for you


Dear Sir, we commit our selves wholly to your disposal; for you know what is
fitting to be done far better than we. -- But what will ye do in my Brother's
business


Well: Let him take the Musick-Girl; and so bid adieu to Wenching.


That Is very reasonable.

Gentlemen, Your Favor.



