THE Tricks of Phormio.

A COMEDY, Acted at the Roman Sports, WHEN L. Posthumous Albinus and L.
Cornelius Merula, were Curule Edil's, By the Company of L Ambivius Turpio, and
L. Attilius of Preneste

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was performed on
Unequal FLUTES

It was taken from the GREEK of Apollodorus, call*d Epidicazomenos, and Acted
four times

Under the Consulship of C. Fannius and M. Valerius.

A. V. C. 592. Before Christ 159.

Scene, ATHENS.

TIME, about Six or Seven Hours.

The Street before Door. The Forenoon. MY very good Friend and Countryman
Geta, came to me esterday about the Arrears of a small parcel of Money he had
left in my Hands formerl: he begged me to get it up; so I have, and am just
carrying it to him. His young Master has picked up a Wife I hear: And this
looks as if 'twere a Present for Mrs. Bride. What a confounded Custom it is for
those who have but a very little, to be always feeding them that have
abundance! All that this poor Fellow now, by starving himself, has bit by bit,
with much ado, scraped together out of his pitiful Allowance, must go at one
swoop, People never considering the pains it cost him the getting. And then
poor Geta must be squeezed over again, to give her Ladyship Joy of her
Bantling: And after that again upon the Anniversary of the Brat's Nativity,
when it is dedicated forsooth. The Child is the pretended Cause of all the
Presents, but it is the Mother runs away with all -- But is not that Geta there?
--





He Is here, spare your breath.


Davus! I was just coming to give ye the meeting.


Here, hold your Hand.


Thou art an honest Fellow, and 'twas kindly done not to forget me.


Kind indeed, as the World goes now, I Will assure ye: For it is come to that
pass, that a Man must pray, and be thankful, to get his own again. But wh^ so
concerned


Who I? -- If you did but know the dread and danger I Am in.


As how pray?


You shall know upon promise of Secrecy.


Away Simpleton! What, trust me with thy Money, and afraid to trust me with a
Secret? I shou'dn't get a Pin of my Sle^ve by falsifying with thee now


Prithee hear me then.


Yes, with both Ears.


You know, Mr. Chremes, our old Master's elder Brother, don't ye?


Ver^ well.


And his Son Phedrie too?


As well as I know thee.


It so fell out, that the old Gentlemen took a Journey both together, Chremes
to Lemno, and our good Man to Cilicia, where an old Crony of his had wheadled
him over, Letter upon Letter, promising him whole Mountains of Gold, with the
Devil and all


What to him that had enough, and to spare already?


Never admire Man, it is his humor.


Pox of ill Luck! What pity it is I was not Grand Signior!


When the old Gentlemen set out, they made me Tutor to their Sons.


Ah Geta, that was a hard task for thee.


Troth so I found it by woeful Experience: I remember my unlucky Genius bore
very hard upon me that day. At first I began to be strict with them: But what
need many words? My faithfulness to my old Masters cost me many a sore drubbing


I thought as much: For what a madness is it to strive against the stream?


Upo' that I let go the Reins, and contented my self to drive as they would have me.


You knew how to make your own Markets.


As for our Youngster, he was very regular for a while: But Mr. Phedrie
immediately picked up his Musick-Girl, and fell up to the Ears in Love. She was
kept, it seems, by a damnable griping Cockbawd. -- The old Gentlemen had taken
care to keep the young Men's Pockets at Low Water: So that our amorous Spark
could do nothing but look Babies in his Mistress's Eyes, follow her upo' the
Scent, and perhaps lead her to the Musick-School and back again. I and my young
Master having little else to do, must needs bear the Spark company. Right
against the School was a Barber's Shop, there did we commonly stay her coming
out. One day while we were dancing Attendance, in comes a young Fellow
snivelling at such a rate, as made ^^ all wonder, and ask him, What he all'd?
Why (said he) never till now did I take Poverty for such a sad grievous Burden:
Hand by I ve just been seeing a poor Girl, crying and taking on most heavily
for the Death of her Mother, by whose dead Body she was then sitting. She had
neither Friends, Acquaintance, nor Relation, besides one poor old Woman, to
stand by her, or look after the Funeral. It grieved me to the very Soul, for
she was an extraordinary Beauty. In short, we were all set agog at the Story.
Mr. A^^ipho presently cried, Shall we go and see her? Ay, ay, says* another,
Let Us go, prithee honest Man bring us to the place. Away we go, come to her,
see her: A pretty Rogue in faith she was: And what is more, she had nothing of
Ornament to set off her beauty: Her Hair all about her Ears, her Feet bare, all
out of order, her Cheeks blubbered, and dressed in such a pickle, that if she
had not been lovely to a Miracle, these Circumstances would have made her very
disagreeable. The Spark that was enam^^r'd with the Mu^ick-Girl only said,
She Is well enough; but ours, --





Can ye guess how dee^ly? -- But now pray observe what came on it. The very next
day he goes right to the old Woman, and very fairly begs her leave for a Nights
Lodging; which she as fairly denied him, telling him, That his pretensions were
unreasonable, that the Girl was a Citizen's Daughter, well-bred, and of a good
Family; that if he would take her for better for worse, he had the Law to bear
him out in it; but if not, she had no more to say to him. This put my Gentleman
to a sad Nonplus* Marry her he would with all his Heart, but was afraid of the
old Gentleman abroad


Would Not his Father have allowed on it, think ye, when he came back?


What? to have married a Girl, who had neither Fortune nor Honor? Not whilst
his Eyes were open


Well, and what came on it at last?


What? -- Why a certain wheadling Ras^al, Phormio by Name, an audacious Fellow,
would ^h^ Devil had him for me


What of him prithee?


He put this damned Project into the young Man (...) ^ead I Am just about to
tell ye -- You know it is the ^aw here, that all Orphan-Girls must be married to
the next of Kin, and the same Law (...) the next of kin to marry them. Now,
says he, I Will say you are the Girl's Kinsman, and commence ^ S^^ against ye,
pretending to be a Friend of her Fa^^^^ (...) and bring it to a Trial; as for
who was her (...) who her Mother, and how you came to be her (...) let me alone
for forging all, to the best advan^^^e ^oo. When you disprove none of all this,
I shall (...) ye. When your Father comes home, he will be for t^^^^^ing o^me: But
what care I? the Girl will be (...) own


A very pretty piece of Roguery in troth!


Antipho was persuaded, the Business done, the Cause ^ry'd, we Cast, and he
Married


What Is that you tell me?


It Is even as I say.


Ah poor Geta, what will become of thee then?


Faith I cannot tell; only thus much I know, that fall back, fall edge, we must
bear it


Now I like ye: Spoken like a Philosopher!


I Have no hopes but in this Inventing-Noddle of my own.


I commend thee.


Should I go now and fee some petry Friend to plead for me thus! Good, Sir,
pardon him this once, but if he ever does the like again, I Will not open my
Mouth for him. 'Twere well if he didn't add, But when I am gone; Hang him Do


But now for this Musick-Wench's Gentleman Usher, how he comes off?


Poorly enough, Jove knows.


I warrant he has but little of the Ready to bestow on her.


Not a Sowse: Only fine Words and gay Promises.


Is his Father come home or no?


Not yet.


When do you look for your old Gentleman?


I cannot tell positively; but I hear there s^a Letter from him at the
Custom-House, that came up by the Packet-Boat: I am just stepping for it


Do You want any thing else with me, Geta?


Nothing, but good bu'y to ye.


Dorcio.


Phedrie, is it come to that pass now, that I should be afraid of my own
Father, when I think of his return^ and a Father that loves me so! If I had not
been a rash Block-head, I might have expected his coming home as became me


What do you mean by all this?


A pretty question! When you your self were my chiefest Confident in this mad
Prank. Well, I could wish Phormio's Tongue had been out before he had given me
such Counsel, and pressed my willing Mind on to what has been the Foundation of
all my Miseries. If I had not enjoyed her at all, it might have made me
melancholy for three or four days or so; but then I shou'dn't have had this
perpetual vexation upon me, --


I give ye the hearing


-- Whilst I am in hourly expectations of my Father's sudden return, who will
pluck me from her Embraces


Others are grieved for want of Enjoyment, but you for being glutted with it.
The God of Love has been too too liberal to ye, Cousin: For my part, yours is
a Life I Would as soon wish for, and desire, as any whatever. I should thank the
Gods did they bless me with so long a Banque^ of Love as you have been blessed
withal, and would be content to die the next mom^nt. Pray consider with your
self what trouble I endure by being debarred from the thing I love, and what
comfort you might take in your plentiful Enjoyment. I Will say nothing of your
having got a civil well-bred Women without any charge, and of your being
married to your own liking, to a Person of an unspotted Reputation. It Is
manifest you're happy, and only want a Mind that can tell when things are well.
Had you to do with a Bawd as I have, you would feel how it is then. But it is the
humor of us all, never to be contented


But it is you your self, Cousin, that are the happy Man in my Opinion, who have
Power to consult at large, whether you had best keep her, love her still or
leave her: But I Have brought my self into such an unhappy strait, that I neither
know how to quit mine, nor keep her




Geta in such haste? -- It Is he for certain. -- Alas! my poor Heart forbodes
that he is the Messenger of some bad News or other


Geta, you are a dead Man, if thou do not find some cunning shift or other to
save thy self, and that quickly too, so many Misfortunes are ready to seize
thee, before thou^rt prepared for em. I can neither tell how to escape em, nor
how to get rid of them. Our Fool-hardiness can never be concealed any longer.
If my Noddle does not befriend us at this pinch, either I or my poor Master must
smart for it


What makes him in such a Chafe trow?





What ill Luck is come to Town now?


for excusing my self I had as good talk to the Wind. -- Poor Geta! Alas for
thee! -- Then besides my own trouble, Mr. Antipho is a great vexation to my
Spirits: It Is him I pity, and am now so much concerned for: It Is he that keeps
me here; else I Would have made a shift for one well enough, and been revenged of
the old Man's peevish Temper: I Would have fingered away something, and shown him a
fair pair of Heels for it





Antipho? Or where shall I go look him?





I expect to hear of some shrewd Misfortune by this Messenger.


Pho! Are ye out of your Wits?


[Going off.





You, Sir, stay.





Geta, I say!





Prithee what is the News? Dispatch it in a word if ye can.


I will so.


Out with it quick.


Just now at the Waterside I saw --


My Father?


You Have hit it.


Then I Am a dead Man.


God's Death!


Prithee what shall I do?





I tell ye I saw his Father, your Uncle.


What course shall I take to help me out in this sudden Misfortune? Ah! Should
my unlucky


Ti^^^ (...) since things (...) are, you oug^^ (...) the more upon your Gu^^^^
(...) Terfaint (...) fair Lady

(...)


But considering your present Circumstan^^^, you have great reason to be
otherwise; for if you^^ Fame, sees ye once down in the mouth, he will conclude you
are guilty of all


He Is in the right on it.


I cannot change my Nature.


Suppose you were put to a worse strait.


Why, not being able to do this, I should never do that.


Pshaw! He Is good for nothing, Mr. Phedrie: Condemned already: Why should we
stand trifling away our time with him? I Will even be jogging


And so will I too.


Prithee, Geta! -- Suppose I look thus? --


Not worth a Farthing.


Do but look on me now.

What do you think of this?


No.


What say ye to it now?


Somewhat thereabouts.


Will this?


That will do it -- Keep ye there: Besure you answer him Word for Word, and let
not his nussing and hectoring dash you out o'Countenance


Well enough.


Say you were forced to it by the Law, and the Rules of Court; do you mark me. --





What ha'ye a mind to do, Sir? VVhither so fast? Stay, stay, I say.


I know my own frailty, and fault too well: I give up my Phanie, and my Life
into your hands.


Prithee, Geta, what shall we do now?


Why, you must expect a rattling, but poor Geta (if my Stars don't deceive me)
will be trussed up to rights. Troth, I think we must even follow the same
Advice we gave to Mr. Antipho


Hang your Must! What you would have me do, command me freely.


Don't ye remember, when we began this Enterprise first, how ye agreed to
manage it? That their Plea was just, fair, sure; in fine, the clearest Case in
the World


I do.


Why this you must make use of: If you can think of a better or a siner, take
it


I Will do what I can.


Do you give the first onset, I Will lie in ambush as a reserve for ye when you
begin to give ground


Well enough.



Phedrie and Geta move on one side, observing him.




My Son Antipho marry without my consent? Sure a Father's Authority. -- But why
did I name Authority? Methinks the fear of my Displeasure might have created
some Respect; what has he no shame in him? O impundent wickedness! And that
Hang-dog Geta, the Tutor too. --





It Was done against his Will, the Law sore'd him to it. Well, I understand, I
grant it


That Is well enough.














Videlicet, When my Master comes home, I must expect to beat Hemp in Beidewell
all the days of my Life, to be whipped and shackled, or sent to the
Plough-tail. All this will be no News to me, if any thing happens better than I
expect, I shall look upon it as clear Gains, in troth. -- But why ^on't you go to
him, and sweeten him up a little




Hedrie to meet me.


Dear Uncle your humble Servant.


I Am glad to see thee, Coz; but where is P^ripho?


You're welcome home, Sir.


I thank ye; -- but pray answer my Question.


He Is very well, Sir; within call. -- But your Affairs, Sir, do they succeed to
your desire





Why what is amiss, Sir?


Amiss, Phedrie? You Have made a fine Match among ye in my absence, have not ye?


Oh, ho! Is It that you are so angry with him for?


A rare Actor in faith.


And have NOT I reason to be so? I wish in my Soul, I could but set my Eyes upon
him, he should see what it is to provoke a good-natured Fathe


Indeed, Sir, he has done nothing to deserve your Anger.


Look ye here! They Are all of a plece, hang all on a string; know one, know
all.


Not so neither, Sir.


Does one commit a Reguery, whip, th. other's ready to bear him out in it. Does
this do it? Then that is ready to plead for him: So they help one another by
turns


The old Man has hit upon both of their Humors better than he is aware on.


If it was not a Bargain between ye, you would not take his part so much as you
do


Sir, if my Cousin Antipho had commit a fault to the prejudice either of his
Honor a Estate, I d sooner die than plead for him, but should leave him to
suffer the just demerit of ^^ Crimes. But of the other hand, if some Chea,
emboldned in his Knaveries, should lay his Snares to entrap unwary Youth, and
should compass his designs, is the fault ours, or the Judges? Who ^^ through
Envy take from the Rich their Right, and for pity give it to the Poor


Weren't I privy to this whole Affair, I should think what he says to be as
true as an Oracle.


Can any Judge 'th' World know a Man's Right, when he stands like a Post as he
did


He did like a modest Gentleman: For when he came in the open Court, Fear and
Modesty so surpised him, that he could not utter a word of what he had
premeditated


Mumpsimus. --


Ho! Mr. Governor! The very prop of our Family! The Trustee o'r my Son in my
absence! I Am yours too.


I hear, Sir, you're pleased to blame us all* undeservedly, and me too that
deserve it least of all: For what would ye had me have done i^th' case, when you
know, Sir, the Law will not admit a Slave to plead or be a Witness


Pish! I grant all this; and more, than that I own the Boy was bashful, and you
a Slave. But let her be never so much akin, there was no necessity for his
having her: the Law only obliges him to give her a Portion, and let her look
out for another Husband. Your reason pray, why he rather chose to marry a
Beggar Wench


Nay 'twasn't Reason, but Money that was wanting.


He might have borrowed it any where.


Any where, say ye? Sooner said than done.


Rather than fail he should have taken it up on Interest.


Ho, bravely spoken! As though any one would have trusted him while you are alive.


Well (...) It shall never go thus, it must not be. Shall I suster em to live
together one day to an end? No, I would not do it for the World. -- but I Would fain
^^a^ this pal^y Rascal brought before me, or else direct me where he lives


You mean Phormio, Sir, don't ye?


Yes, the Woman's great Spokes-man.


I Will fetch him so ye presently.


But where is Antipho now?


Gone out, Sir.


Good Coz, do so much as seek him out for me, and bring him hither.


I Am going to rights.


To his Mistress he means.




I Will just step in and return my Thanks for my safe arrival; from thence I Will
to the Piazza, and call some Friends to stand by me in this business, that I
may not be unprovided when Phormio come^


Antipho play at Bopeep for fear of his Father, say ye?


Very true.


So: Then poor Phany's left in the Lurch?


Even so.


And the old Man's upo' the fret?


Yes, indeed.


Phormio. Thou must take what comes on it, and even brew as thou have b^k'd. --
To work then, old Boy


Prithee about it then.





It Is you we only trust to.





'Twas you put us upon it.











What design are ye upon now?


What would ye have me, but to let Phanie be his Wife still, clear Mr. Antipho
of all, and turn the whole stream of the old Man's Rage upon my self


Spoken like a courageous Man, and a true Friend! But in faith, honest Phormio,
I Am afraid this Lion's Heart of yours will bring that pretty Face to look through
a Pillory at the last


Pshaw! Never fear that; I amn't to learn my Trade now; I know where to take
sure footing. How many Men do you think I have in my time beat, and left for
dead, Townsmen as well as Strangers? The oftener I exercised my Hand, the more
Skill I had. And pray when did ye ever hear of an Action of Battery clapped
upon my Back


How comes that about?


Pho! your Fowlers never aim at a Hawk ^r Kite that do mischief; but it is your
harmless Birds they are for. In one there is Profit, in the other only Powder
and Shot thrown away. Just so they who have any thing to lose are in the most
danger: It Is well known I Have nothing to lose but my Skin. You Will say perhaps,
They might seize my Person: They Would be hanged before they would maintain such a
devouring Glutton, as I am. And troth, I fancy they are in the right on it, not
to do me such an excellent good turn for a bad one


Faith, my young Master will n^r be able to make ye amends for this kindness.


It Is we Vassals ow more than our Lives are worth for the Favors of our
Princes. Is Not a rare thing to feast it at free-cost, to perfume and bath ones
self, to have no trouble upon your Spirit, whilst another ^ear^ the Trouble and
Charge of all? For you to have all things to your liking, to laugh and take
^ou^ pleasure, whilst he (...) himself; to be honored with the first Cup, and
set at the upper end of the Table, to eat of the puzzling Banquet


What do you mean by the Word puzzling?


When there is such a Plenty as would puzzle ye which Dish to choose first, ye
little Rogue: And considering how delicious and costly all these Blessings are:
How can ye call the Founder of 'em less than a God on Earth




Our old Gentleman's just upon us: Mind your hits, the first Onset will be the
bloodiest of all: If you can bear the brunt of that, you may manage him as you
please afterward





The Man's in wrath.


Demipho deny Phanie to be his Kinswoman? Heavens bless us! -- What, deny his
own Kindred


He does, what then?


I think yonder is our Antagonist. -- Keep those Neighbors.





No.


Nor yet Stilpho neither?


No marry does not he.





You Would better be hanged ye Dog, than c^ll my Master covetous.





Stilpho, 'cause he was an old poor Man, that lived by his Labor, and was for
the most part in the Country, where he hired a small piece of Ground of my
Father: The poor old Man has often complained to me how basely Demipho his
Kinsman had slighted him; but what a Man did he slight thus? Why one of the
honestest Men that ever wore a Head


See that he and you prove as good as ye pretend.


You be hanged: If I had not found him to be as I say, I would never have
engaged our Family in such terrible feuds upon her account, who is now so
ungenteely slighted by your Master


What, still abuse my Master behind his back? Ye foul mouthed Va^let.


It Is no more than he deserves.


Say ye so, Jail-bird?


Geta!











Don't Quarrel.


This Vari^t has been laying such base things to your Worship's Charge, that
none but this Scoundrel would ^a been guilty of


Well, say no more on it --


You are for pumping, as though you didn'^ know him.


I know him?


Most certainly.


I deny't, you that affirm it, prove it, and rub up my Memory.


I warrant you don't know one of your own Flesh and Blood.


You make me stark mad: Cannot ye tell me his Name?


His Name? with all my heart.


Why don't ye out with it then?


Pox on it, it is slipped out of my Head.


Hah! What Is that you mutter?





I scorn your Words.


Stilpho, Stilpho.


The Name, Ha -- ha -- he -- But what care I? The Name's Stilpho.


Who, say ye?


I say Stilpho; as if you didn't know him.


I ll take my Corporal Oath I know no such Man, nor was I ever akin to any of
that Name


Is It possible? Arn't you ashamed to say so? Had he left you a sowsing Sum of
Money --


The Devil take ye.


-- You Would have been the first that should have traced him, and his Pedigree, from
the Conqueror


Well, be it so: If I had undertaken it, I must have made it out, which way she
was my Kinswoman: Therefore prithee do you the same: Tell me which way she is
related to me


Faith well urged, Sir --


I made it out as clear as the Sun in open Court, where 'twas to be done: If
'twere Forgery, why didn't your Son make it appear to be so


Tell not me of my Son; he behaved himself worse than a Changling.


But you, Sir, that are so wondrous wise, may go into Court, and procure a
second Hearing o^th same Cause, since you play Rex here, and take upon ye the
sole Prerogative of having the same Cause tried twice over


Though I Have been much abused in this business, yet rather than be plagued with
Lawsuits, and your impertinent Tongue, let her go for my Kinswoman, I Will give
her a Portion as the Law requires -- Here, take half a score Pieces, and away
with her.


Ha -- ha -- he --: A very pleasant Man in faith!


What would the Man have, don't I offer very fair? Cannot I claim the Privilege
of the Common Law


Is it so, sweet Sir? When you have made use of a Citizen's Daughter, does the
Law allow ye to give her a Whores Pay, and send her packing? Or does not it
rather require she should be married to the next of Kin, and keep to one Man,
lest want should make her do that which might be a Scandal to her Quality? And
you are against that, are ye


Ay, ay, to the next of Kin: But what is she akin to us? Or how pray?


Enough, enough: We needn't try it over again.


I don't design it; but I shall push hard till I Have made an end on it,


You Would as good catch Butter-flies.


I say, I will do it.


Besides, Sir, it is none of your Concern: It Is your Son is cast, and not you:
Your Dancing days were over long ago


Then you may suppose it is he that says all this to ye; if not, I Will turn him
and his Trull out of Doors


Now his Back's up.


You Would be twice advised first.


You unlucky Dog, are ye resolved to do me all the mischief you're able?


He Is damnably afraid, tho he does all he can to conceal it.





What? Cannot ye endure with patience what cannot be cured! Come, do like a
Gentleman, that there may be a lasting Friendship between us.


Pish! Do I care a Fig for your Friendship? Or desire to see, or be acquainted
with such a Rascal


If you two can agree upon it, you will have a Comfortress in your old Age: Pray
consider what time a day it is with ye


Pox, let her comfort thee; take her and the Devil to boot.


Good Sir, moderate your Passion.


Mark this then, without any more ado: If you don't make all the haste you can,
and take away your Jil^, I Will thrust her out by Head and Shoulders: That Is the
Word for all, Mr. Knave


If ye o^^er her the least Affront unworthy her Quality, I Will clap a swinging
Action upon your back: That Is the Word for all, Mr. Alderman! -- Hark ye, if
the want me, you will find me at home.





What a World of Care and Vexation has my Son brought me into, by entangling
himself, as well as me, in this unlucky Match! -- Then I cannot get one glimps
of him, to know what he can say, or how he stands affected. -- Run in, Geta,
and see whether he be come home or no


I will, Sir.


You see, Gentlemen, how the case stands; What had I best to do? Your Advice,
Mr Counselor.


Meaning me, Sir? -- I think Mr. Cratine's the fittest Man to speak first, if
you please


Come on then, Mr. Cratine.


Who I, Sir?


Yes you, Sir.


I Would willingly advis^ ye for the best; I am of Opinion, Sir, that what your Son
did in your absence, should, in Right and Reason, be nulled and void ipso
facto; and the Law will allow it. Dixi


Now for you, Mr Hogio.


I believe Mr. Cratine spoke as he thought; but as the saying is, So many Men,
so many Minds, every one as they like. In my Opinion, what the Law has once
determined shou'dn't be cancelled, and 'twou'd be a Scandal to offer at such a
thing


Now for your Opinion, Mr. Crito.


I desire time to consider on it; it is a weighty Affair.


Ha'^ye any further occasion for our Advice?


You Have made rare work on it i'saith.

Exeun^ Hegi^, ^ratine and Crito.


alone looking after 'em. So I Am more to seek now than ever.




They say, Sir, he is not come back yet.


I Will even stay till my Brother comes home; what Advice he gives in this case,
that I Will follow. I Will enquire at the Waterside when they expect him.


And I Will go see for Mr. Antipho, and let him know how Squares go -- But look
yonder, he comes in Pudding-time




Antipho, thou and this faint Heart of thine are mightily to be blamed: What?
run away, and leave thy very Life and Soul to the Management of Deputies?
Could think they would take more care of thy business than thy self? Let other
Matters have gone how they would, the dear Creature at home ought to have been
looked after, for fear the poor Soul, that has lodged all her Hopes and
Fortunes in thy hands, should, for trusting to thy Promises, come to any
mischief





It Was thee I wanted, Geta.


-- But for all that we didn't flinch an Ace.


Prithee tell me in what posture my Affairs stand, and what have I to trust to;
does my Father know any thing of the main business


Not a bit.


Is there any hopes left then?


Indeed I cannot tell --


Dear ^eart!.


But Mr. Phedrie pleaded like a Counselor for ye.


He has been always very obliging.


Then for Phormio, in this as in all other things, he has behaved himself like
a Hero


What did he do?


He quite out-hector'd your Father, as huffing as he was.


God-a-mercy Phormio, I faith.


And I also did my best.





The first Encounter was just as I tell ye; at present Matters go on very
smoothly; your Father, it seems, will let things rest till your Uncle comes
home


Why till then?


He says he will be advised by him in this business.


Ah Geta! How I dread his coming home, since I understand it is his Sentence
alone I must stand or fall by


Look, yonder is your Cousin Phedrie.


Where?


Look ye! He Is just coming out piping hot from his old Sweating-House.




Nay, good Dorio, hear me.


The Devil I will.


But one word


Pox! don't teaze me so.


Do but hear what I Have to say.


I Am sick with hearing the same thing a thousand times over.


But I have something to offer, that you will be glad to hear of.


Well, let us hear it then.


Is It impossible for me to prevail upon ye, to stay but three short days? --


I Would have scored it up for a Wonder, if you had made me any new offer.








You will not believe me then.


That Is we^ guessed.


Suppose I pass my Word?


Mere Stuff!


You Would say 'twas one of the best days work ye er made in y^^r Life.


Idle Stories.


Do but trust me, and you shall not repent it; you will find it t^ be as I say.


Silly Phansies!


Good now try me, the time is not so long.


Cuckoo -- Cuckoo.


You are my Relation, you are my Father, you are my Friend, you. --





Are ye of such a barbarous and inflexible Nature, that neither Pity nor
Entreaties can mollify ye


And are you, Sir, so senseless and shameless, as to think your gay Words, and
fine flourishes, shall chouse me out of what is my own for nothing





Alas! I am convinced he is in the right on it.





And must this Misfortune needs light upo' me in a time when my Cousin Antipho
is in the very same trouble himself





Antipho's the happiest Man alive.


Who I?


In having what you love in your own Custody; not tor^^ented like me, with such
a Villain as this


In my Custody say ye? -- Ay, indeed, I have, as the saying is, A Wolf by the
Ears: How to part from her I know not, and how to keep her I cannot tell


My very Case, by the Mackins.





That Rascal? -- Why, like a hard-hearted wretch as he is, he has gone and sold
my dearest Pamphila


How! Sold her?


Sold her, say ye?


He has so.


A mighty business indeed, for a Man to make Money of his own Wares!


I cannot prevail upon him to stay but three days for me, and break off the
Bargain with him, till such time as I shall receive the Money my Friends
promised to lend me. --


You Will crack my Brain-pan presently.


He desires but a very little time, Dorio; Prithee ben't so hard-hearted. The
favor shall be requited to you double, take my Word for it


Mere Shams!





That Is neither my Fault, nor yours.


A plague on thee for a Rascal.


Look ye; many a month have I born with you against the grain; you 'ye brought
me nothing but Court Promises, Crocodile's Tears, and a Beggar's Purse: Now on
the other hand, I Have g^t me a Chapman that will pay me freely without
snivelling. Therefore, Sir, cede majoribus, I say


In good earnest, as I remember there was a day set for my Cousin to have her.


There was so.


Do I deny't?


Is that day past then?


No, but another's day came before it.


Arn't ye ashamed of your Knavery?


Not as long as I can get by it.


Sordid Villain!


Is that your conscience now?


It Is so; if you like me, make use of me.


Why should you cheat him thus?


Rather I faith, Mr. Antipho, it is he cheats me; he knew well enough what I
was, but I took him for another sort of a Gentleman; so that he has deceived
me: I am just for all the World as I used to be. But let that pass; thus much
I Will do. To morrow Morning the Captain says he will bring me the Money: Now, Mr.
Phedrie, if you will bring it first, I ll follow my own Rule, First come, first
served; and so good bu'y to ye


What shall I do now? -- Where shall poor I now, that am worse than nothing,
scrape up such a Sum at so short a warning? -- If I could but have got him to
have stayed three days, the Money was promised me by that time.





It Is but right and reason we should, I confess.


Come on then; you are the Man that can keep his Head above Water.


What would ye have me do?


Procure him the Money.


That I would with all my heart; but where must I have it?


My Father's at home.


That I know, but what then?


Po! A word to the Wise is enough.


Is it so, Sir?


Yes, indeed.


Very pretty Counsel I faith! You may do it your self if you please; shall not I
come off with flying Colors, if I escape with a whole Skin upo' your account?
But I must needs venture my Neck upon his account too


That Is true I own.


What, Geta! Am I no body wi'ye then?


Not so neither: -- But is it nothing in your Esteem, that we have stirred up the
old Gentleman's Anger against us all, unless we provoke him again beyond all
hopes of Reconcilement


Shall my Rival carry away my dearest beyond Sea, and I be the Spectator too?
-- Ah Cousin, speak with me while you may; take one farewell Look before I leave
ye


Why, Sir, what crotchet comes in your Head now? Prithee tell me.


I Will traverse Sea and Land after her, or perish in the Attempt; that I Am
resolved on


A good Journey to ye, Sir; but soft and fair goes far.


Prithee, Geta, see if thou can help him a little.


Help him, pray how?


Good now try however, for fear he do what may make us both repent, more or
less, hereafter


My Invention's upo'th' Tenter-hooks. --


Don't be afraid; we'll stand and fall with thee upon all accounts. ^





Fourscore Guinea's or so: That Is all.


Fourscore Guineas? Whoop! Whoop! She Is a plaguey dear bit, Mr. Phedrie.


No, she is an extraordinary Pennyworth.


Come, no more; you shall ha the Mone^.





Come let me alone.


I want it just now.


And you shall have it just now; but I shall want Phormio, to second me in the
design





He Is ready I warrant ye; lay what load you will upo' him he will bear't. Hes the
only Man of a thousand that is true to his Friend


Let Us away to him, out of hand.


Can I do ye any kindness in this Matter?


None at all. Pray go and comfort the poor Creature at home, I know shes almost
dead with fear -- Why do you stay, Sir


I know nothing I Would do with a more willing mind.


How will ye go to work in this business?


I Will tell ye as we go along; therefore pray be moving.


Lemno, Brother? Have ye brought your Daughter along with ye?


No.


Why didn't ye?


After he, Mother saw I made a longer stay here than ordinary, and that the
Girl's Age would not admit of my farther delays, she and her whole Family took
Shipping, and (as I am informed) came hither in search after me


When you heard of this, how came you to tarry so long behind 'em?


Alas! I was sick all the time.


How came that? Of what Distemper?


that is a Question! Above Threescore is Distemper sufficient -- But the Master
of the Ship that brought 'em over, told me, they are all landed safe


But, Brother, have ye heard of the shrewd Misfortune that happened to my Son in
my absence


Ay truly; and it is that has broke the Neck of all my designs: For should I
offer my Daughter in Marriage to a Stranger, I must tell the whole Story, how I
came by her, and by whom; but you, I know, are as true to my Interest as I can
be my self. A Stranger, that would be my Son-in-Law, would hold his Tongue, as
long as we were good Friends together; but if he once disregarded me, he will
know more by half than I Would have him. Then I Am horribly afraid the business
should come to my Wife's Ear; if it does, my only remedy will be to take up my
Heels, and be marching: For to speak the Truth, I of the whole Family am the
only Friend to my self


I m sensible of it Brother, and it is a great trouble to me; but Ill leave no
Stone unturned, till I Have proved my self as good as my word.




Phormio in all my Life. I came to the Bastard to tell him that we wanted the
Ready, and how we designed to angle for it; and I had scarce opened my Lips, but
he knew my meaning by my gaping. He was tickled at the Fancy, clappd me upo'
th back fort, asked for the old Gentleman, and on his Marrow-bones thanked the
Gods a thousand times, for putting an opportunity into his hands of showing
himself as much Mr. Phcdrie's, as he had been Mr Antipho's Friend. I bid him
wait for me at the Piazza, where I Would bring the old Cully to him. -- Phedries
Father? Pish! What a Bru^e am I to be afraid of that? Is It cause thou have
caught two Wood-cocks I thy Spring instead of one! -- I Am sure it is safest to
have two Strings to one's B^w. -- Ill try to get it of him I (...) designed; if
he answers my expectation, well: If not, then have at the New-comer




Geta's coming back. -- Hah! Yonder Is my Uncle wi' my Father, laying their
Heads together God's Death! How I dread what Designs his coming will put my Father
upon


Chremes?


Honest Geta, how is it?


You're heartily welcome home, Sir.


I thank ye.


How goes the World with you, Sir?


Much at one, upon my arrival here I find a great many Alterations, as I used
to do


So: Then you have heard of Mr. Antipho's business, I suppose?


All, all.


Chremes?


'Twas that point he and I were just discoursing on.


In troth, Sir, I Have been hammering upo' the same thing, and fancy I ve thought
of an Expedient


Geta! What Expedient?


Just as I parted from you, by chance who should I meet with but Phormio?


Who, Phormio?


Yes; he that is the young Woman's --


Oh, I know him.


The Toy came into my Head, to feel his Pulse a little. I took him aside,
Prithee, Phormio (said I) had not ye better make an end of this Quarrel by fair
means, rather than foul? My Master's a free-hearted Gentleman, and one that
hates Law: But I faith, if he had taken all his Friends Advice, he d have kickd
her to the Devil before this time. --


-- I Will warrant ye you think the Law can take hold of him for that? Pish!
We^ve had Council upon the Business already: And take my word for it, if you
once begin a Suit with this Gentleman -- he has his Tongue so well hung, he will
make ye smoke for it. But suppose he be Cast; it is no hanging Matter, and a
little Money will put all to rights again. After this Discourse, I found my
Gentleman took down a Peg lower: Here Is only you and my self (continued I)
Prithee, good Boy, tell me what you demand down and down, to secure my Master
from hearing any more of this business, to take the Girl off our hands, and to
plague us no farther --


What has Old-Nick bewitched the Fellow?


-- I Am sure of this, if you will but propose any thing that is just and
reasonable, he is such a civil Gentleman, there will not be two words between ye


Who gave you Commission to say all this?


Po! He could not have spoken better to bring our design about.


All Is lost.


On with your Story.


At first he talked like a Madman.


Why, what did he ask?


What? The Devil and all: Even what his wild Fancy pleased.


Let Us hear't tho.


He talked of two or three hundred Guinea's.


As many Devils take him: What, has he no Conscience?


I told him as much my self: Good now (said I) suppose he had a Daughter of his
own to marry, would he give any more! He Is but little the better I s^d for
having none, since one's clapped on his Back he m^st give a Portion to. To be
short, omitting his ^dle Impertinencies, at last he came to this conclusion:
I Have had a mind (said he) from the very first, to marry my Friends Daughters,
which was no more than Reason required. For I foresaw the trouble the Girl
would be put to, by marrying into a rich Family, she being poor would be made a
Slave, not a Wife. But to be plain with ye, I want a Wife with a little Money
to pay off my Debts, now if Mr Demipho will give as large a Portion with her,
as I Am like to have with one I Am already engaged to, I Will choose her before any
Woman alive


A body don't know what to make on it, whether it be Foolery or Knavery, or
whether the Man is silly or wilful.


What if he has pawned his Soul, must we redeem it?


I Have mortgaged (continued he) a piece of ground for 25 pounds --


Well, well! Let him take her, I Will pay the Money.


and an old House or two for as much more.


Pox on him, that is too much by half [angrily


Make no noise then, he shall have as much as that of me.


Then (quoth he) my Wife must have a Maid, more Household Stuff must be bought,
and a good handsome Wedding kept: These things put all together will come to 25
pounds more


He shall clap six hundred Actions upon my back first. I Will not part with a
Groat: Shall the paltry Rascal make a Property of me.


Good Brother be pacified, I Will lay down the Money, get you but your Son in the
Mood to marry the Woman we'd have him


Alas for me! Ah, Geta, thy Treacheries have undone me.


It Is upo' my account she is turned out, and it is but reason I should pay the
Costs and Charges


Let me know (said he) their Minds as soon as ye can, whether th^^ design to
let me have her or no, that I may get clear of the other, and know what to
trust to; for the other Girl's Friends are fully designed this very day to lay
me down the Portion


He shall have it immediately, let him break off that Match, and take this Girl.


And the Devil take him into the Bargain.


I Have very luckily brought with me the Rent of my Wife's Farm at Lemno: I Will
take that, and tell my Wife you had an occasion to borrow it.


Hark ye, Mr. Rogue!


Ha, Sir.


Do You know what you have been a doing?


Yes; nabb'd both the old Fools of their Money.


Is that enough think ye?


Faith, Sir, I cannot tell, 'twas as much as you ordered me.


Dog! Are ye at cross Questions with me?


What do you mean, Sir?


Why, your Rogueship has brought Matters to that fine pass, that now I may go
hang my self. To make an Example of thee to all Villains, Heaven, Hell and
Earth confound thee. If you want any thing to be well done, I Will recommend ye
to my Spark here. -- What occasion had you to rip up the old Sore? And bring my
Dear's Name into Question? You Have possessed my Father with new hopes of turning
her off: And, sweet Sir, suppo^ing Phormio should accept of the Portion, he must
marry her then to be sure: And what will become of me then


Hell be hanged before he marries her.


I believe so: But when they come to demand their Money back again, he will
rather choose to go to Jail than betray us, I warrant ye.


All Stories may be the worse for telling: The best part of this you have left
out, and only mentioned the worst. Now pray hear mine: If he receives the
Portion, he is obliged to marry her, as you say; I own: But then there must be
time allowed for getting things ready for the Wedding, for inviting of Guests,
and for the offering of his Oblations: The mean time Mr. Phedrie's Friends will
procure him the Money they promised him, and out of this may Phormio refund to
the old Gentlefolks


Why so? Or what pretense can he make?


Pretense? O he has a thousand in his Budget. What Prodigies have I seen (may
he pretend) since we made the Bargain? There came a strange Black Dog yelping
into my House: A flying Dragon came down the Water-spout, my speckled Hen
crow^d; The Priest forbad it, and the cunning Man charged me to meddle with no
new Business till Winter. These are as good pretenses as any In The World. Thus
shall things be ordered


Provided they were so --


So they shall, take my Word for it -- But here comes your Father, withdraw and
tell Mr. Phedrie the Money's our own.







Solomon is, where there is no need on it!


Troth, and so you had need, Brother: But make haste whilst the Fit is upon
him. If the other Woman should chance to be beforehand with us, he may throw
us off perhaps


You are i^th' right on it.


Bring me to him, Geta.


I am ready, Sir.


When you have dispatched that, step over to my Wife, and desire her to have
some Discourse with the Girl before we pack her off, that she may tell her, She
has no Cause to be angry that we'd have her married to Phormio, since he is the
sitter Match, being intimately acquainted with her: and that we haven't done
contrary to our Duty, because we have given him as good a Portion as he desired


Pshaw! what a-duce is all this to you?


O, a great deal, Brother.


Is Not it enough for you to do your Duty, unless all the World commend ye
for it


I Would willingly have her Consent though, that she might not pretend she was turned
out o'door


I can tell her all this my self.


But 'twill come better from a Woman though.


I Will call upo' your Wife then.




I Am thinking now what corner of the Town to beat up for these Women of Lemno.


I hear the young Gentleman's Father takes it very heinously.


What disconsolate old Creature's that which comes from my Brothers?





In good truth, if I ben't mightily out I m^ guess, and if my Eyesight don't
deceive me, (...) my Daughter's Nurse.





What had I best to do i'th^ Case?





Had I best go to her, or tarry here, an^ pick something out of her Discourse?





It Is she for certain -- I Will go talk to her.


Whose Voice is that trow?


Nurse Sophrona!

Soph And calls me too?


Look this way a little.





No.


What deny your own Name?


Prithee, Nurse, come a little this way from that Door; and not a word more of
Stilpho


No, Sir: And like your Worship, arn't you he you always said you were?


S^t, S^t.


What? I hope, Sir, you arn't afraid of this Door.


No; but I Have a mad Woman there in a Cage: and I formerly gave my self a
Nickname for fear some of you should indiscreetly blab it about, and perhaps
my Wife should smell a Rat


And troth that is the reason that we poor Souls could never hear any tale or
tidings of ye in Town


Prithee tell me what business you had at that House you came out of? And where
ha you left your Mistresses


A-lack-a-day.


Hah! What Is the Matter? They arn't dead I hope


Your Daughter is alive; but the poor creat^^e her Mother broke her Heart with
grief.


That Is bad News, indeed.


But I, a forlorn poor old Woman, married your Daughter as well as I could, to
the young Gentleman of that House


What to Antipho?


Yes, Sir, to him.


How! Has he got two Wives then?


How so, I beseech ye? He never married any other but this.


What Is become of her then that went for his Kinswoman?


Your Daughter Sir's the Person.


How!


'Twas only a contrivance of ours, that since he loved her, he might marry her
without a Portion


Bless me! How often do things fall out by chance, which we have not the heart
to wish for! Upo' my coming home, I Have found my Daughter settled with the
Person I desired, and just as I wish^d. The very thing my Brother and I aimed
at, this old Woman, without any care of ours, has most carefully hit on.


Now, Sir, you had best see what is to be done in the case, the young Gentleman's
Fa^^^^ now come home, who, they say, highl^ (...) the Marriage





Not from me, Sir.


Come along, ye shall hear all within.


WE can blame none but our selves, for Knaves thriving in their Knavery; for we
must, forsooth, affect to be thought genteel and generous: But we shou'dn't
have outrun the Constable, as the saying is. We could not be content to be
cheated by him, but we must freely throw the Rascal a good lump of Money into
the Bargain, for him to live on till he can play us such another Dog-trick


Nothing more certain.


Now adays, none are rewarded more than such Rogues as would persuade ye
black's white


Nothing more sure.


How like a couple of Fools we have managed our business with this Rascal!


It Is managed well enough, provided he keeps to his word, and marries her.


Is there any danger of that now?


Faith, Sir, he is such a wavering sort of a Fellow, that I cannot tell but he
may recant


The Devil! He recant?


That I cannot tell, Sir; I only suppose such a thing.


I Will do as my Brother would have me; step and bring his Wife to talk with the
young Woman. -- Do you, Geta, go in and acquaint the Girl of her coming.


We Have Coined Money for Mr. Phedrie: The old Gentlemen are as quiet as Lambs:
Care is taken that Phany shall not stir a Foot out of our House for the present.
--,But what next, Friend Geta? What Is to be done now? -- You Are as deep in the
Dirt as ever; and Tinker-like, in mending one hole have made two -- It Is true,
there is a sound drubbing put off for a day or two longer; but in faith thou will
receive it, and with Interest too, if thou do not look about thee -- Well,
I Will go home and teach Phany her Lesson, that she may not be surpised at
Phormio's Behavior, or Nau^istrata's Discourse.







So I will, Brother.


Let your Endeavors be as serviceable to me now, as before your Purse was.


I should be glad to pleasure ye: But in troth, Brother, it is all long of my
naughty Man's carelessness that I cannot do so handsomely as I would


How so pray?


Why, in troth he does not manage the Estate, my Father left me, worth a
Farthing; for he constantly made nigh Four hundred Pound a Year of his Land. --
Bless me! to see the difference of Me


Nigh Four hundred Pound a Year, say ye?


Yes, indeed, when things were at a lower rate by far than now.


Very strange!


You wonder At it I warrant ye.


AY, and I cannot forbear.


Would I had been a Man for his sake, I Would have shown him --


Ay, aY, so you would.


How I would have --





I Will be ruled by ye: -- But here comes my good Man from your House.




Ho! Brother, have ye paid away the Money yet, or no?


I did that presently.


I wish you had not. --


Why do you wish I had not, Brother?


Nothing, all is well.


But hark ye, did ye tell the young Woman upon what account your Wife was
coming to her


Every bit on it.


Well, and what says she?


She cannot be persuaded to it.


Why cannot she tho?


Because of the Love that is between 'em.


Pish! What Is that to us?


O very much; -- Besides I Have found her to be our real Kinswoman.


How? Are you mad too?


You Will find it so as I say: I don't speak but upon good grounds, pray
recollect your self a little


Certainly you are mad.


Good Brother Demipho, you will not wrong your Kinswoman, will ye?


She Is none of mine.


Don't say so; her Father has another Name, and that bred your mistake.


What? Didn't she know her own Father?


Yes marry did she.


Why didn't he call himself by his own Name then?


Will ye never believe, nor understand me?




How should I, if you will not tell me --


You^ll spoil all.


I cannot imagine what the business should be.


Faith, nor I.


Must ye needs know all? As I hope for mercy, there is none so nigh akin to her
as you and I


Bless my Soul! Let Us all go in together; I Will know something or nothing of her.


Hold! Them. What Is the Matter?


Have I got so little Credit with you, Brother?


Would ye have me credit you without searching any further into the business?
-- Well, be it so then: But how will ye bestow your Friend's Daughter the while


She Will do well enough.


Must we turn her off then?


Why not?


And keep this Creature here?


Yes.


Well, Sister, you may go home again if you please.


Troth, I think it is much the better way to keep her still, than part with her;
for when I first saw her, she looked very much like a Gentlewoman.


Now what is all this business?





Yes.


Wonderful! The best Luck in the World. I find it is my own Daughter that is
married to your Son


Hah! Is It possible?


This is no safe place to tell ye.


Step into my House then.


But hark ye, I would not have so much as the two Boys know any thing of this.


Let my own Concerns go as they will, yet it is a Comfort to me that Matters go
so well with my Cousin. It Is a piece of Art for a Man to rule his Appetite so,
that a small Matter shall satisfy him when his Fortune is at the lowest Ebb.
No sooner had my Cousin Phedrie received the Money, but his Cares are over, for
my part I know no way to free my self from mine. If this business be concealed,
I shall be always in fear; if discovered Infamy will be my reward. -- I
could not have the Heart to go home, if I had not some-small hopes of enjoying my
dear Phanie still. -- But where shall I meet with Geta. to know of him what may
be the most convenient time of showing my self to my Father




care that Phedrie should now enjoy her as his own; since she is now out of her
Slavery. -- I Have one thing still in hand which must be dispatched, that is, To
get leave of these old Curmudgeons to go and tope it a little, for I Have cut out
a few odd days for my own diversion


Look, here is Phormio. -- What say?


What, Sir?


What Is my Cousin Phedrie about? Does he pretend to play the Epicure in Love?


He Is going in his turn to act your part now.


Prithee, what part?


Of keeping out of his old Daddy's clutches, and he begs you would act his, and
plead his Cause for him; for he and I are to sing Old Rose together. -- I am
going to tell the old Gentlemen, that I am bound for Sunio-Fair, to buy the
little Slave Geta told 'em of. That so when they see I Am not in Town, they
may not imagine I make their Money fly. -- But your Door goes there


Prithee see who comes out.


It Is Geta.




Antipho obliged to thee for this Day's Work.








^'ye understand what he says?


Do you, Sir?


Not a word.


Nor I neither.


Dorio's, for there to be sure they are.


Soho, Geta!


Soho, to you too. -- 'Tisn't strange nor new for a Man of my quality to be
interrupted in the middle of his Journey


Why, Geta!


Faith he keeps his pace for all that. Your Impertinence shall never bring me
back


VVon't ye stay then?


Sirrah you shall be kick^d -- Some saucy Scullion or other that calls me thus.


You shall be served the same sauce, if ye don't stay, ye Dog.


This must be one that knows me very well, that is so free of his Compliments.








O, Sir! The happiest Man this day alive! without doubt you are the Darling of
the Skies


So I would be, and would have ye give me some reason to believe so.


Is Not it enough if I plunge ye over Head and Ears in Joy?


You kill me with Impertinence.


Hang your Preambles, and say what you have to say quickly.


Oh! -- Art thou here, old Rock?


Yes; But why this fooling?


Observe then; Hem them! -- As soon^ as we gave you the Money at the Piazza, we
went strait home.


For what?


Nay, there I leave ye^ That Is nothing to our business, Sir, -- Just as I was
going int^^ner Apartment, her Boy Mida runs up to me, catches me hold by the
Cloak, and pulls me back. I turned about, and asked him what he meant; he told
me no body must come nigh his Mistress; that Sophrona just now brought Mr.
Demipho's Brother, Mr. Chremes; and that there they were all together. At that
word, I steals me up to the Door a Tiptoe, I went and stood close up to it, held
my Breath, laid my Ear to the Keyhole, and very attentively listened to their
Discourse, thus


O brave Geta!


There did I hear the pleasantest Story in the World, that before George I
could hardly forbear huzzaing there


For what?


For what do you think?


I cannot guess.


And such a prodigious wonderful Passage too. -- 'Slid, your Uncle is found to
be your Spouse's own Father


Hah! What Is that?


He had formerly some private Acquaintance with her Mother at Lemno.


Mere Dreams! How came she not to know her own Father then?


You may suppose there was a Reason for that: But do you think I that was without
Doors, could understand every word that was spoke within


Faith now I think on it, there was some such flying Report.


I Will give ye some further Proof. -- Whilst I stood listening, out goes your
Uncle, and presently after brought your Father in along with him; and bo^^ said
you might keep her and welcome, In short, they have sent me to look for ye, and
bring ye to em


my Soul! away with me in a moment: -- Are ye mad to stay?


I Will do it, as I Am a living Man.


Dear Rogue, Phormio, farewell.


Adieu, adieu, Sir.



Phormio alone.

Let me die, if this be'nt a lucky hit. I am glad with all my Heart they have met
with such good Fortune, and so unexpectedly too. Faith now I Have an excellent
opportunity of bubbling both the old Fellows, and of taking the Money-care off
Phedrie's hands: So that he needn't be beholding to any of his Friends for it:
For the same Money I squeezed from these old Gripes, shall go for Phedrie's
use: And e'gad I Have found out a way will do it effectually: I must get me a new
stately Gate, and a fine set Countenance. -- But I Will step into the next blind
Alley, and pop out upon 'em as soon as they appear; for now I Am not for
Sunio-Fair, as I pretended




Phormio, that we may recover our Money, before he makes it all go to wreck.


Demipho be at home, that I may --


We were coming to you, Mr. Phormio.


Upo'th'old business I warrant.


Yes, truly.


So I thought; but what need of that? A good Jest in troth. What, were ye
afraid I should not stand to what I said? Hark ye, Gentlemen, tho I am but a
poor Fellow, I always took care to be a Man of my Word





Yes, indeed


For that reason I Am come on purpose to tell ye, Sir, that I am ready, and you
may give her away as soon as you please; for I Have thrown off all my other
business, as 'twas ^easor* I should, when I saw that you (Gentlemen) were so
eager upon this


But my Brother here advises me to the contrary: For (says he) by doing this
you will become the common Town-talk; when you might have put her away with some
Credit, then you would not: And 'twou'd be a Scandal to turn her off now she is
married to your Son. In fine, he used almost the same Reasons, you urged just
now, against me


Marry come up, how merry you are upon me!


How so?


How so quoth a? Why now I can never marry the the other. With what Face, think
ye, can I go again to her I just now so bafely turned off


Antipho will not endure to part with her.


Besides I find that Antipho will not endure to part with her. -- Therefore, good
Phormio, let me desire ye to step to the Bankers, and order the Money to be
paid me back again


What? When I Have just paid it away to my Creditors?





If you will let me have the Woman according to promise, so be it; if you design
to keep her Person, I Will keep her Portion, Mr. Demipho: For there is no reason I
should be fobb'd by ye for your pleasure only, since to save your Credit I
threw off another that would have had as good a Portion to a Farthing


Old-Nick take thee with thy Rhodomontades for a Rogue as thou art; I warrant,
you think I don't know you or your damned Tricks either


This puts me beyond all patience.


Why, would you marry her if she were proffered to ye?


Try me, try me.


That so my Son might Bed and Board with her at your House: Was that your Plot?


Ha! What Is that you sa^?


I say, give me my Money.


And I say, give me my Wife.


Come before a Justice of Peace, Sirrah,


A Justice of Peace? Nay, if you be thereabouts, I Will --


What will ye do?


Who I, Sir? I warrant you suppose I Have none but Portionless Clients; but I Will
have ye to know, I Have those with Portions too


What Is that to us?


Nothing, Sir; only I know one of them in this Town, whose Husband had --


The Devil.


What Is the matter now?


-- Another Wife at Lemno.


I am dead. --


-- By whom he had a Daughter, which he brought up and no body ever the wiser.


I am buried.


I Will just now go and acquaint the Gentlewoman with the long and the short on it.





Ah, ha, Sir! Are you the Party concerned?


How basely the Rogue plays upon us?


Come, we'll discharge ye.


Mere Flams.


What would ye have more? I tell ye we'll forgive ye the Money you have got of
ours.


I hear ye. -- What a plague d'^e play Childrens play with me? I wont, I will;
I will and I will not again; Give, take; it is said and unsaid, done and undone
again


By what means? Or how the duce came he to know this?


I cannot imagine; for I am certain I never told any living Soul of it.


There Is Witchcraft in it, I Will be sworn, else.


I Have given them a Bone to pick.





O lamentable! If I don't look about me I shall be trepanned, as sure as a Gun.
They make toward me like a couple of Bullies to hector me.








Is this your dealings, Gentlemen? You come upon me very cunningly methinks:
But in troth, Mr. Demipho, ^ou've done your Brother but little good by
provoking me thus. --


Plagues and Fu^ies seize the Rogue, and cast him into the deepest Pit of Hell!
Was there ever such an impudent Dog upon the Face of the Earth? Does Not this
R^gue deserve to be transported at the public Charge to some Desert Island


He has got me so upon the hank, that I know not what course to take with him.


I Have found a way: Let Us have him before a Justice.


Before a Justice? Ay, the She-Justice of this House then.


Follow him and hold him fast, till I call my Servants out.





I Will clap an Action upon your back, Mr. Demipho. Them. Do It then.


And another upon yours, Mr. Chremes.







Are ye at that Sport? Nay then it is time to cry out; Nausistrata, come hither
a little


Gag the Villain.





Nausistrata, I say.


Will Not ye hold your Tongue, Sirrah?


Plague! I hold my Tongue?





Or scratch my Eyes out; I Have a way to be revenged for all that.



Phormio: Chremes looks very simply.


Who calls me?


Zookers!


Good Husband, what disturbance is this?


Hah! What is your Mouth stopped now?




What Fellow's this? VVon't ye tell me?


He tell ye, Madam? In Faith his Head is so giddy, he cannot tell where he is
himself


Good Duck! Don't believe one word he says.


Do but go and feel him, Madam; and hang me if he ben't as cold as a Stone.


That signifies nothing.


What then? What does the Fellow talk of?


I Will tell ye, Madam, pray mind me.


Are ye resolved to believe him, Duck?


Prithee what can I believe, he has told me nothing yet.


The poor Man's fear has put him out of his Wits.


In troth this cannot be for nothing that you should be in such a fright.


Who I in a fright?


Ay, for certain; for if you ben't, and if this I Am going to tell, is of no
consequence, pray tell it y^^ self, Sir


Y^^ ^ascal, shall he tell it to humor you?


Oh you do ra^ely in taking your Brother's part


What, Husband, will not ye tell me the Business then?





Bu^, what But?


There Is no oc^^^on for it --


Not for you, perhaps; but for her there is. -- At Lemno. --


Ha! what says he?


Dog be silent


-- Without your knowledge --


-- Undone


-- He married a Wife.

upon the Ground.


Who, my Husband? Heavens forbid that.


Of My Soul it is all true.


Alas-a-day I am utterly ruined.


And there he got a Daughter by her, which you never dreamt of. --


What will become of me now?


Oh Heavens! Base and treacherou^ this.


It Is as I say.


Was there ever such an unworthy Action heard of? When they come to their
Wives, they pretend they are old, forsooth -- ^ address my self to you,
Brother, for I am (...) to speak to him. Was it for this he we^^ so often, and
stayed so long at Lemno? Was this ^^^ low Price of Corn that made our Rents
f^^l


Indeed, Sister, I own he was in some fault, but yet it is a venial one.


He preaches to the Wind.


It was not out of Contempt or Aversion to you he did this. About fifteen years
ago, he, in his Drink, had to do with this Woman, and had this Daughter by her,
but never touched her since; she is now dead, and gone out of the way, who was
your only grievance. Therefore, good Sister, take it patiently, as you used to
do other things


Take it patiently? No: I had rather part from him for ever: For what can I
hope for now? Can I expect Age will teach him better things? If that would have
don't, he was old enough then: Or is my Age and Beauty like to please him more
than formerly? What reason can ye give to make me to look, or hope for his
amendment


Chremes's Funeral, now is the time. Now let any Man provoke my Honor that
dares, I Will serve him the same sauce I Will warrant him. -- Let him be Friends
with me now as soon as he please: I Have swing'd him off sufficiently for once;
and she has wherewithal to hit him in the Teeth as long as he has an hour to
live





I Am satisfied in that as well as you your self.


Do You really think I deserved this ill usage at his hands?


Not in the least -- But since all your Complaints cannot undo what is already
done, forget and forgive: He begs your pardon, owns his Fault, and promises
amends. What can ye desire more


Phedrie. -- Hark ye, Madam, let me put in a word before you answer.


Let Us hear it then.


I cokes'd your Husband out of Threescore and Fifteen Pounds, which I gave to
your Son to buy a Sweetheart of his of an old Pandar










He shall be ruled by you.


Well! that you may know my mind plainly, I Will neither pardon him, promise him
any thing, nor give him any Answer till I see my Son, to whose determination I
refer all; and shall do what he orders


You Have done very discreetly, Madam.





Yes indeed, Madam, I am come off rarely and beyond expectation.


Pray, honest Man, what may I call your Name.


Mine, Madam? It Is Phormio, your whole Family's humble Servant, and especially
Mr Phedrie^s


Honest Phormio! Whatever kindness I can do thee, and thou desire, be it in
Word or Deed I^il do it


You honor me too much, Madam.


Troth it is no more than your deserve.


First then, Madam, will ye do something that will pleasure, me and fret your
Husband


With all my Heart.


If you please invite me to Supper then.


Faith come and welcome.


Let Us go in then.


Agreed, -- But where is Phedrie our Referee all this while?


I hope he will be here anon. --

To the Spectators.

Gentlemen,

Fare ye well, and clap.



