THE Fair ANDRIAN, A COMEDY, Acted at the Feast of Cibele, WHEN M. Fulvius and
M. Glabrio were Curule Edil's, By the Company of L Ambivius Turpio. and L.
Attilius of Prenestae

Flaccus made free by Claudius, composed the Music, which was perform*d on two
equal Flutes, the one Right-handed, and the other Left handed

It was taken wholly from the Greek and Acted,

Under the Consulship of M. Marcellus, and C. Sulpicius.

A. V. C. 587. before Christ. 162.

Scene, ATHENS.

The TIME about Seven or Eight Hours.

The Street before s Door. The Forenoon. AWAY with those things there, and be
gone. -- But do you stay, Socia; I Have something to say to you.


I understand ye, Sir: You Would ha'Care taken of these things, I suppose.


Quite another Business.


Can my poor Skill be further Serviceable to you?


Nay, there is no need of that Skill of yours in the case: Be but as Faithful and
Secret as ye used to be, and the business is done


I wait your Pleasure, Sir.


I Am sure you cannot but know what a fair and easy Master I have been t^ye e're
since I bought ye of a Child, and in requital of your good Services, I gave ye
your Freedom, the most that I could do for ye


Sir, I Am not forgetful of it.


Nor do I repent it.


I Am very glad, Sir, to find ye pleased with any thing I ever did, or can do;
and am much obliged to ye for your good Opinion of me. But with Submission,
Sir, this somewhat troubles me: for such a reminding a Man of a Benefit seems
to intimate as if he were insensible of it. -- But in one Word, Sir, What can I
serve you in


I Will tell you: in the first place you are to understand, that the Business of
the Wedding is all sham


Why de'e put it upo'th World then?


I Will tell ye the whole Mystery of it, and give ye such a light into my Son's
Conversation and my Designs, that you will immediately see what part you are to
act in this Business. -- When I first took him from School, Socia, I left him a
little to himself, to try which way his Genius would lead him: which was hard
to know for certain, or indeed tolerably to guess at, whilst he was a Boy,
under the Awe of a Rod and Master


Right, Sir.


You know it is a common thing for most young Men, to give up themselves wholly
either to Horses, Hounds, Books, or the like: New he was not over-fond of any
of these, though he was in at all. This I liked well


Y' had reason, Sir: For not to be too much ^ddicted to any one thing, I take
to be the most excellent Rule of Life


Then for his Conversation Socia: He was never uneasy upon any occasion, nor
would he ever spoil Company, but closed with all Humors, never thwarting
others, nor assuming too much to himself. And I think this was the way to get
Reputation and Friends without Envy


He took a wise Course: For as the World goes now, Complaisance goes current,
when Plaindealing will not pass


In this Interim, there comes a Woman about three Years ago from Andro, who
takes Lodgings in our Neighborhood, forced hither by the scantiness of her own
Fortune, and the neglect of her Relations: But she was a fine Woman indeed, and
in the very Flower of her Age


Ah, Sir! I fear this same fine Woman bodes us no good.


At first indeed, she lived a very honest; thrifty, and laborious sort of a
Life, earning her Bread at her Fingers ends. But afterward, when the
Love-business came on, and the Golden Promises from this and the other, (as
People had rather follow their Pleasure than their Work) she accepts of their
Offers, and immediately sets up the Trad^. Some of her Gallants, as ill luck
would have it, carried my Boy along with 'em for Company's sake. Then said I to
my self, the Fool's noo^'d, noo^'d, he is smitten. So I made it my Business
in the Morning to watch the Lacky's going and coming, and would ask 'em now and
then, Hark ye good Boy, tell me ye little Rogue to whose turn fell Chyrsis last
Night? For you must know that was the Name she went by


Very well, Sir.


They Would tell me, Phedrus, Clinie, or Niceratus perhaps, (for those were all in
with her) Ay, Rut my good Lads, What did Pamphilus? What did ^e? (they would cry)
Why? he only eat with 'em, and paid his Club. This pleased me to the very Soul.
So I fell to pumping 'em another time, but not one Word that Pamphilus had ever
been dabbling. This I thought a sufficient Trial, and a considerable Instance
of his Virtue. For he that has to do with such sort of Cattle, and comes off
clear, you may safely trust him with the Management of himself. When others saw
how I relish^t it, they fell in one and all, and said a hundred fine things, I
warrant ye, what a Blessed Father I was to have such a towardly Son. -- In one
Word, the Reputation of it wrought so upon my Neighbor Chremes, that nothing
would serve him, but a Match between my Son and his Daughter, with a good
Portion over and above too, The Proposal took, we both agreed upon it, and this
was to have been the Wedding Day


Very good, And what obstruction now?


I Will tell ye. -- In a very few days whilst this was doing, Chyrsis dies --


In a good hour, Sir. We are all made then. To be free with ye, I did n't like
this same Chrysis


My Son, you must know, and the humble Servants of Chrysis were together, and
together took care of the Funeral: He was really sad, and now and then dropped a
Tear, which I did n't dislike. For, thought I, He that is so much moved, and
upon such slender acquaintance, What if she had been his own Mistress? How
would he take on if I should die? All this I looked upon to be the Effects of
good Nature, and a sweet Temper. -- To c^nclude, I my self to humor him went
also to the Funeral without suspecting any thing


How, Sir! And what then?


I Will tell ye -- The Body is brought out, the Company moves, and amongst the
Women 'twas my Fortune to cast my Eye upon a young Creature, with a Face --


Good enough perhaps.


Ay Socia, and an Air so modest, so pretty, nothing could be more charming. --
Now finding this Woman so much more concerned than the rest, and her Behavior
much more genteel and graceful than any there; I went and whispered to the
Servants to know who she was. They told me, The dead Person's Sister. That Word
struck me to the very Heart. Well, well, (though I) the whole Business is
unravelled, and the Tears and the Whining are no longer a Mystery


I Am in such a Fright to know how this business will come off.


Well: the Funeral marches, we follow, come to the place where the Body was to
be laid, put it into the Fire, and give her a Tear: Mean time, the Sister I
told ye of, runs like a Madwoman up to the Fire, and truly a'most into it. At
which Pamphilus in a great fright discovers tha^ Love which he had so well
dissembled, and concealed before, runs to her, takes her in his Arms My dear
Gleycerie, says he, What de^e do? Would ye destroy your self? With that all in
Tears she flings her self upon him, and with so much tenderness too, that you
might easily pe^ceive 'twasn't the first time of their acquaintance


Ah! How Is this Sir?


Away go I very moody and dissatisfied, but not enough to make a Wrangle on it,
For if I had chid him, he would have said, Pray, Sir, What have I done? What have I
deserved, Sir? What Is my Fault, Sir? A foolish Woman would have burnt her self,
I hinderd her, and saved her Life it may be. This is as fair a Plea as can be


You Have Reason, Sir: For had you blamed him for saving her out of the Flames,
what would ye have done if he had thrown her in


Next day comes my Neighbor Chremes storming like a Madman, That there was
Roguery ith Case, and that most certainly Pamphilus, and this Woman were
engaged together. I denied it, he affirmed it, and in fine, went his way in a
Pet as if he would break ^ff the Match with his Daughter


And did n't ye School your Son upon this?


No, no: 'twas n't enough yet to pick a ^^^rrel at.


How so I beseech ye?


He might have said: You, Sir, are now putting a stop to all my Pleasures of
this nature; Shortly I must be married, and live after another's Humor, mean
time, pray Sir, let me live a little after my own. --


Well Sir! If this will not do, What can you possibly find to chide him for?


Why, if he refuses to marry upon the account of his Miss, that Business, must
be laid home to him first. Now my design is by means of this Mock-wedding to
find a just Cause of being angry, if he shou'dn't agree to it: And that if the
Rogue Davus has any Trick in his Head, he may put it off if he can; I a'nt like
to be his Chapman: Tho I know he will be at it tooth and nail, and more to plague
me perhaps, than to pleasure my Son


What makes ye think so?


De'e ask that Question? Ever while ye live, What Is bred in the Bone will never
out o^ the Flesh. But if I find him tampering, I Will --. In short, put the Case
that Pamphilus shou'dn't boggle (as I heartily wish he would not) then Chremes
is only ^o be sweetened, and I hope 'twill do. Now the part you're to act is to
countenance the Marriage, mortify Davus, watch the Boy, and be a Spy upon
their Councels


Enough Sir, I Will take care of all. -- Now I suppose we may retire Sir.


Go. I Will follow ye presently.

My Life on it, this Boy o^mine has no stomach to a Wife: For if he had, Davus
would not have been so startled at the Talk of a Match in hand. -- But hold ye!
Yonder he comes.

















Davus!





Here, Sir, this way.


What would this old Fellow have?





Who I, Sir?


And ask Questions too? -- Sirrah it is the Town-talk that my Son keeps a Miss.


The Town's much concerned I warrant for what our Pam does.


Rascal! De'e mind what I say or no?


O yes, Sir, very much.


I should be looked upon as a hard Father I know, for peeping into his
Intrigues. -- For what is gone and past I regard not much; for he had Liberty
enough, so long as 'twas fit for me to give it, or him to take it. But now the
Case is alter^d, and new Circumstances call for new Measures and new Manners;
and therefore I require you, or if 'twere decent, let me entreat ye good Davus,
that my Son take up and mend


Sir, I Am in the dark all this while.


Your Wenchers you know are sick at the Name of Wife and Matrimony --


Ay, Sir, so they say indeed.


-- Then if any such has got a Tutor of his own Kidney, he shall be sure to be
plied of the weak side


Really, Sir, I don't understand ye.


No? That Is strange.


Why Sir, I Am plain Davus still, no Conjurer.


Then you would have the rest of my Mind in words at length.


Yes Sir, to choose.


Look ye Sirrah! if I catch ye in any of your Roguy Legerdemain tricks to
hinder this Match, or that ye have a Mind to show how shrewd you are at
Plotting: I Will have your Skin stripped over your Ears, and you sent to Bridewel
Sirrah! there to lie and rot, upon this Condition, and by this token, that when
e're I take you out, I Will give you leave to put me in. -- What, does your
Rogueship understand me now? Have NOT I spoke plain enough yet


It Is the very thing it self without going about.


Well Sirrah! Trick me in any thing but this.


Gently, gently, Sir, I beseech ye.


Rascal de'e laugh at me too? But I know ye well enough, and remember what I
tell ye; don't Act hand over Head, and pretend ye had not fair play shown ye. --
Take this for a Warning


Davy, it is high time to bestir thy stumps, and to leave offdozing; at least if
a body may guess at the old Man's meaning by his Mumping. If these Brains don't
help me out at a dead lift, to pot goes Pilgarlick, or his Master for certain.
-- Glycerie (whether Wife or Miss I cannot tell) is undoubtedly with Child by my
master; and troth it is the pleasantest thing in the World, to tell their
Adventure; for it looks more like a Romance than an Amo^r. Whatsee're God
sends'em they are resolved to bring it up. And they have contrived to sham the
Mother upon the World for a Citizen of Athens. Now (say they) once upon a time
there was a certain old Man a Merchant of our Town, who was cast away upon the
Isle of Andro: He dying, there did Chrysis' s Father take this young Orphan
cast ashore, and bring her up. It Is all stuff. OF my conscience it sounds like
a Lie; but however the Story takes hugely with them. --

Mysis. -- I Will even go to the Change, and hunt up my Master Pamphilus, his
Father else will go nigh to surprise him before he has his Lesson






Archillis without all this noise: You Would have me go for Lesbia by all means. But
upon my word she is a true Toper, and a giddy Brain Creature, not fit to be
trusted with a Womans's first Labor; But however I ll bring her. --

But what is here to do that Mr. Pamphilus is so strangely discrdered? -- It
makes me tremble to think what should be the matter. -- There Is Mischief a
brewing, and I ll stay a little to see what comes on it





What mischief's in the Wind now trow?


witness, before God and Man there is no such thing in nature. -- My Father it
seems designed to have married me to day. One would have thought I might have
known on it before. Or at least have had some notice of my own Wedding


Alas! What Is this I hear?


Chremes too? Who but lately declared against the Match. Has he changed his own
Mind, because he saw I would not change mine? Is he so resolutely bent to rend
me from my dearest Glycerie? If it comes to that once, I Am ruined beyond
Redemption. -- Was there ever such an awkward and unlucky Fellow upon Earth as
I? -- O Heavens! Is there no way to shuffle off the Alliance with this Chremes?
How grossly have I been abused and trampled on? All things were agreed upon,
every thing signed and sealed; of a sudden I their Cast-off must be brought on
again. But why? unless there is some damnable Roguery in the bottom on it, which I
am very suspicious of. Now because this Dowdy lies upon her Father's Hands, and
no body else will, I must


I vow these Words make my poor heart go pit-a-pat.


Change as he went by me even now, Pamphilus, You're to be married to day, go
home presently, and make your self ready: Which sounded to me as if he said, Go
home presently and hang your self. It stunn d me so that I had not a Word to
answer, nor the least Color of excuse, though never so foolish, false, or
extravagant. In short, I was Tongue-tied. -- But if any body should ask me now,
What would ye have done, supposing you had had timely notice on it? Why sure I
would have done something not to have done this. -- But as the Case now stands,
Where shall I begin first? so many Difficulties cumber and distract my Soul at
once: On this side Love, pity for that dear Creature, and my being urged to
marry; on that side the Reverence due to my Father who has hitherto indulged me
in all that Heart could wish, and shall I turn Rebel at last? -- I Am very
unhappy, and which side to take to I know not





What Voice is that? -- Is it you Mysis? in good time.


O Mr. Pamphilus, well met.


How does your Mistress.


She Sir? Why she is just now in her Labor: then it goes the harder with the
poor Creature, because she hears this is to be your Wedding day; but worst of
all for fear you should leave her at ^ast


Oh hideous! Can I entertain such a Thought? Shall I suffer an unfortunate
Gentlewoman to be ruined for my Pleasure, who put her Life and Honor into my
hands? One that I Have lov d with the Fondness and Tenderness of a Husband? Shall
I expose so much Modesty and Virtue to the Temptation of so strong a Necessity?
No, no: it must never be


That is to say if you could help it; but I Am afraid you cannot stand the Brunt
of your Father


But can ye think me such a Scoundrel? So ungrateful? So inhumane? Nay and so
brutal too? That neither Friendship, Love, nor Honor, can make or keep me
honest


This I can assure ye, Sir, you do her great wrong if you forget her.


Forget her, say ye? -- O Mysis, Mysis! What Chrysis spoke to me about her
Sister, is to this day engraven on my Heart, she was just dying, I remember,
when she called; I went to her, you among ye withdrew, we alone, she thus
began. My Pamphilus! you see the Youth and Beauty of this poor Girl; I needn't
tell ye how little these signify either to the security of her Virtue, or
Fortune. -- Now by this Hand of yours, and your natural Goodness I beg of ye: I
adjure ye by the Faith you ve given this poor Creature, and by her solitary
Condition, to be true to her, and never for sake her. -- If you ve ever been to
me as my own Brother, if you're the Man in the World whom she ever most esteem,
d, if she never denied ye any thing, that she could grant ye: I now bequeath ye
to her for a Husband, a Friend, a Guardian, and a Father too. I leave ye also
Master of my Fortune to do with it as ye please. -- With these Words she joined
our Hands, and in the very Action died. I received her, and am resolved to keep
her


Indeed, Sir, I hope so.


But why from your Mistress at this time?


I Am going for a Midwife.


Prithee make haste then. [


I understand ye.


How Is this Byrrhie? Is she to be married to Mr. Pamphilus to day? Hah!


Neither better nor worse.


How know ye that?


I had it of Davus at the Change.


Unlucky Creature that I am! There Is some Life in a Man as long as he lies
hovering betwixt hope and fear, but when he comes to despond once, he sinks
amain, and his Heart's as heavy as a lump of Lead. --


For Goodness sake, Sir, be but so much a Philosopher, as if ye cannot have what
ye would, content your self with what you may


Nay, there is nothing I Would have, but my dear Philumena.


Ah, Sir, Were it not much better to try if ye can put that Love out of your
Head, than to indulge your Passion thus, stand blowing o the Cole, and to no
purpose neither


It Is an easier Matter to give Council than to take it, and if you had my
Distemper, you d say so


Well, well, Sir! what ye please for that.


But stay a little, I see Mr. Pamphilus yonder. Since my Life's at stake, I Am
resolv d to make a Bolt or a Shaft on t


What whim take's my Master now?


Why I will so beg, and beg of him, and tell him such a dismal story of my
Love, that I fancy he may be prevailed upon to put off the Wedding for two or
three days; mean time something may happen


And that something is just nothing at all.


What think ye Byrrhie had I best go to him or no?


By all means, Sir, tho to no other purpose than to make him believe you ll
Cuckold him, if he marries her


Go hang your self, ye suspicious Cur.


Charine. -- Your Servant, Sir.


Oh, Sir, the very man I wanted! -- For if you don't keep up my Heart, protect,
assist and advise me, I Am undone


Troth, Sir, you have found me but in a sorry Condition, either to assist or
advise ye. -- But, pray, Sir, tell me what you would have


Arn't you to be married to day, Sir?


It Is so reported.


If ye do, Sir, you have seen your last of me.


Why so, Sir?


Alas, Sir, I daren't tell ye. -- Prithee, Byrrhie, you tell him.


I will, Sir.





He Is only in love with your Spouse, that is all, Sir.


Truly we arn't both of a Mind. -- But, pray be plain with me, Is there no
nearer Engagement between you and her


Ah, Sir, none at all.


O my Soul I wish there were,


Now as you have any Love or Friendship for me, I do adjure ye not to marry her;
--


Sir, I Will do my best in the Case.


-- But if ye cannot avoid it, or if the Wedding be so much to your Heart's
desire, --


My Heart's desire?


-- At least put it off a day or two longer, that I may get out of the way.


But hear me a little, Mr. Charine. This is all to the Tune of, I thank ye for
nothing. For I ll assure ye I Am more against the Match, than you are for it


That word has brought me to Life again.


Now if there be any thing to be done between you and your Man Byrrhie, fall to
work upon it, lie, contrive, do but order the Matter so that she may be yours;
and let me alone to see she shall never be mine


Enough, Sir.


Davus in the lucky Minute, whose Advice I rely upon.


Davus -- but you, Sirrah, are good for nothing, but to tell me what I shall be
never the better for. -- In short, out of my sight


With all my Heart, Sir.






What a world of good News do I bring? -- But where is our Pam. now? For I ve
that to tell him which will rid him of his present Fears, and make his Heart
leap in his Belly


There Is something pleases him, if a Body knew what it were.


There Is nothing in it; the Fellow hasn't heard the Story of my misfortunes.





Do You hear him, Sir?





What not a word to him?





So-ho! Davus, stay.


Pamphilus! the Man I looked for: -- And Heyday! here is Mr. Charine too! rarely
well met, for IN ve Business with ye both


Ah Davus! quite ruined! --





I Am a lost man. --


I know your Grief.


And my Life's at stake. --





I Am to be married --


As if I didn't know that too.


But to day Davus.


Zookers! You Have put me besides my Senses. I know all. -- You're afraid ye
should marry her,


Thou have nicked it. Ay, the very same.


That very same's nothing by this Light, trust me, Sir.


Prithee good Boy, without any more ado rid me from my Fears.


So I will, Sir, in a trice. Imprimis, Mr Chremes parts with no Daughter to day.


How do you know that?


I know it well enough, Sir -- Your Father just now took me aside, and told me,
You must be Married to day, with a long Story at the tail on it, not worth
telling you now. Upon this I ran full speed to the Change, to acquaint you
with it, where when I found ye not, I gets me up on high, then stares me round
about, but no Pamphilus appears. By chance I espied Byrrhie, asked him if he
had seen ye, but no tidings yet. This fretted my very Guts. To work goes my
Noddle, to know what to do. Mean while on my return I began to smell the whole
Business out. A^, ha! there is not a Bit extraordinary for a Treat, the old Man
out of Tune too. A Wedding clapped up in a trice. These things don't hang well
together


Well, what of all this?


Away marched I to Neighbor Chremes's; when I got there, not a Creature
stirring before the Door did I see, which made me laugh in my sleeve


That Is well.


On with your Story.


There staid I some time, but the De^l a Person saw I going out or in, never an
old Governante; nor the least preparations or hurry in all the House


I grant this is a good sign.


Does this look like a Wedding?


Indeed, Davus, I think not.


Marry come up with your think nots -- Ye know nothing I see, why it is as plain
as a Pack Staff. As I was beating the Hoof homewards, who should I meet but Mr.
Chremes's Boy, coming from the Market with a Bunch of Herbs, and Three ha perth
of little little Fishes, for the old Man's Supper


God-a-mercy Davus This day have thou set me upon my Legs again.

hear


What a plaguey Mistake you lie under?


Why so? You're Master is not like to have her


Well done Logic! As if there were never another Man in the World, but your
Worship and my Master. If ye don t look about ye, make Friends to the old
Gentleman, and ply the Lady briskly, ye may snap short for all that tho


Your Councels good, I ll follow't. Tho in troth my hopes have often jilted me,
and so farewell


Prithee Davus, what does my Father propose to himself? what makes him double
thus


I Will tell ye, Sir. If he should take pet now that Mr. Chremes will not part with
his Daughter, he could not but blame himself for it, and right enough too, till
he finds how you stand affected to the Wedding. But if it goes off on your
side, the blame will be laid all at your door; and there will be the Devil to
do then


What? Shall I truckle?


Why, Sir, he is your Father, and you will have a hard task on it Besides your
Mistress has no body to stand by her, upon the least occasion he will quickly
make the Town too hot for her


Too hot for her?


In the turning of a Hand, Sir.


Prithee, honest Davus, what shall I do in this case


Why even tell him you will have her.


Oh!


Why that Sigh now?


What tell him a thing so far from my Heart?


Why not, I pray?


O Davus, never, never --


Never deny't man.


Don't put me upon it.


Consider well what will come on it.


Yes, that 'twill put me out of the one and in with the other.


No, no, you're wide. -- Now I fancy that your Father will say some such thing
as this. Come Son I must needs have ye Marry to day. With all my Heart, say you
-- Well; And what can he quarrel at now? This will ruin all his Designs, and
you in a whole Skin all this while. For it is as certain as certainty it self,
that Mr. Chremes will not give ye his Daughter. So that you needn't break a jot of
your own Measures for fear of his altering his mind. Do but tell your Father
you will marry, and let him be angry if he can. As for your flattering your self,
that no body else will part with his Daughter to one in your Circumstances.
I Will answer that in a word, your Father will tie a Beggar Wench upon your Back,
rather than let ye whore of this rate -- Look ye, if he find ye once
indifferent: He Will sleep over it, and look ye out another no body knows when.
In the mean time something may happen on our side


Think ye so?


No doubt on it, I Will warrant ye.


Have a care where thou leadst me.


What will ye never have done?


Well I ll say as you would have me. But you must take special care it don't come
to my Father's Ear that I Have a Child, and that I Am in for Maintenance


O Confident Devil.


Why she bound me upon my Oath to take care on it, as a Token I would never
forsake her


Well, we'll take care on it --



Yonder comes your Father, put on your the other Face quick.





The good old Man takes it for granted, that you will refuse to marry. He comes
so cogitabund from some by corner or another; he questions not but he has that
in his Head which will put ye to a confounded Nonplus -- Be sure to have all
your Brains about ye


I Will do what I can Davus.


Come, Sir, tell him but you will marry her, and if ever he opens his Mouth to ye
again upon that Business, never believe Davus




Pamphilus's Designs about this Wedding. For this purpose have I dogged Father
Greybeard upon the heel -- O here they are all together. -- Faith I Will play at
Bo-peep here





'S't! mind your Cue.


Pamphilus!








Excellent IN Faith.


I must have ye marry to day as I told ye.


Now I am plaguely afraid whether his answer will be for us.


Sir, I shall be ready to obey ye in this and all other Commands.


Say ye so?


The old Man's Mouth is stopped.


What answered he?


Why this is like a Son, when ye cheerfully do as your Father would have ye


Will ye believe me another time?


For ought I perceive, my poor Master may go whistle for a Wife.


Go in Pamphilus, that you may be at hand when you're wanted.


I Am going, Sir.


Every Man for his own ends. I remember once I had a glimps of this Lass;
'Sbobs! a charming Creature! And Mr Pamphilus is in the right on it, if he had
rather lie by such a one himself than my Master should. -- I Will go tell him
all; it is but venturing a few hard words for a little hard News. Ex. Byr


Now this old Mumpsimus concludes I ve got some notable Intrigue in my Budget,
and that I planted my self here upon the same account


What says Davus to the World?


There Is no News stirring, Sir.


None say ye?


None at all, Sir.


Truly but I looked for something tho.


He has lost his Aim I percieve, and that nettles him too.


Sirrah, can ye speak without a Lie in your Mouth?


Most fluently, Sir.


Come, Do'sn't this Match stick in my Son's Stomach, because of his Amors with
the Stranger


Why truly, Sir, no, -- or were it so, that uneasiness would off in a day or
two's time, (D ye understand me, Sir?) then all would be well again. But now he
has fairly taken the Point by the right handle


I commend him for it.


Indeed when you winked at it, and his Age bore him out in it, he did wench a
little, but then he did it secretly, and like a Man of Honor took care it
should be no Blot to his Scutcheon. -- Now it is time to look out for a Wife,
he has his thoughts wholly upon Matrimony


Methought he looked a little downish upon it tho.


Not at all for that, but there is something else he didn't take so well at your
hands


What Is that pray?


A mere trifle, Sir.


What is it, for a trifle?


Nay nothing at all to speak on.


Well, well, I must know what it is.


He says, You're too sparing of your Purse.


Who I?


Yes, you Sir. -- For, says he, my Father has laid out but Ten Groats for a
Supper, And is that to be my Wedding Treat forsooth? Which of my Companions can
I invite at such a time as this? And under the Rose, Sir, I think you are a
little too closefisted: I could wish it were otherwise


Leave your prating Sirrah.


I ve stung him I see.


Let me alone to see that all be well. --


Hocus be at? -- If there be any piece of Roguery here on foot, I ll lay my
Life he is chief Actor in it.


TRuly Lesbia, you're much in the the right on it. A faithful Lover is a very
great rarity


This Maid belongs to the Andrian; What say you to it?


Yes Sir.


Pamphilus --


What says she?


-- Has signed and sealed over again; --


So, so!


Would the old Man's Ears were stopped, or her Tongue out for me.


-- For whatever God sends her, he has ordered to be brought up.


Confusion! What do I hear? If what she says be true, all is past recovery.

Les. A sweet natured young Gentleman I Will warrant ye.


Oh a most sweet natured -- But come along, for you will be too late else


Well let us in then. Exeunt Mysis and Lesbia.


How shall we recover our selves out of this Relapse.








Oh here begins the Rogues tricks; they pretend a great Belly among 'em to beat
off Mr. Chremes from the Match





Rogue. [to Dav.


Meaning me, Sir?


Ah Sirrah, were your Actors out in their Parts?


I don't understand ye, Sir, in the least.


If this Rascal had served me so in a real wedding here would have been fine
work with a vengeance. But now he makes a Rod for his own Back; for my part I Am
safe enough


Archillis, and for a Woman in her Condition every thing is as well as a Body
could wish. In the first place let her be well bathed; and then let h^ take the
Dose I prescribe her to drink, and just the quantity. I shall be back again in
a minute. -- Pamphilus has got a very pretty Boy. I hope in Heaven he will live
to make as good a Man as his Father, who scorned to wrong this innocent
Creature


What Man alive that knew thee, would not swear that this was one of thy Rogues
tricks


What Rogues tricks, Sir?


Within Doors there were no Orders given about the big-bellied woman; but when
she was once out, she sets up a bawling in the Streets to those within, that
the whole Town might ring on it. -- Why Davus am I to be made a Property; or
what do thou see in my Face, to think of making so palpable an Ass of me? If
it had been more artificial, it would have looked like somewhat of Reverence for
me, if I should have found it out


Faith the old Fool cheats himself, not I.


Didn't I charge ye strictly? Nay didn't I threaten ye too? But what cared you?
'Twas all but so much Breath lost. Can ye think me so mad, as to believe this
woman's brought to Bed


Oh have I found out his blind-side? I know my Cue then.


Have ye never a Tongue in your Head Sirrah?


Why what would ye believe? As if you had not an Item of this beforehand.


Who should give me an Item?


Strange! Did you find out this Imposture, and your self too.


Very fine! I Am laughed at.


I Am sure 'twas told ye Sir; How should you suspect it else?


How? cause I knew thee for a Rogue.


As much as to say I was the Contriver on it.


Nothing so certain. I knew't.


Sir you're mightily mistaken in your Man;


Mistaken in my Man!


For if I go about to speak a Word, you pre^^ly think that I put upon ye.


Belike I lie then.


Troth at this rate I dare scarce move my ^ips to ye.


This I Am certain of, that there has been no h^^ly laid here.


Are ye very certain often? Yet for all that you will have a Child laid at your
door before you're aware on it. This, Sir, will certainly be, and remember that
I told ye on it now, that if there should happen any Roguery in the Case, it
mightn't be laid to Davus's charge. I would feign have ye believe better things
of Davus


But how do you know they will trick a Child upon us?


I heard it, and believe it too. And there are a thousand Circumstances which
make me be of that mind. For first the Gentlewoman cried she was with Child by
your Son, which is found to be a mere sham. As soon as she heard of a Wedding
on foot; her Maid forsooth is posted away presently for the Midwife; and for a
Child over and above. But if it chance that you should not see the Child at
your door, the Wedding may go on for all this


How Is this? -- As soon as ye heard of these Plots, Pray why could not Pamphilus
have been acquainted withal


And who wast do you think but I that parted them? For the whole Town knew that
he was up to the Ears in Love. Now he has set his Mind upon a Wife. As for the
Business of the Child, let me alone with that. Go on with the Wedding as you have
begun, Heavens prosper it I say


Very well! -- Now ye may go in, and wait there till I come, and get ready
what is wanting


Chremes, and beg his Daughter; then if I get her, I Will have a Wedding to day
in spite of their ^eeths. I don't question my Son's promise at all. If he draws
back, I can fairly force him to it now --

Here comes the Man in as good time as a body could wish. -- A good day to ye
Neighbor Chremes


O Sir, you're the Man I looked for.


And I you.


You're well met Sir, -- there are those who told me they heard from your own
Mouth, that this day your Son and my Daughter were to be married. Now I Am come
to see whether you of they are well in their Wits


Have a little patience, and you ll hear my Desires, and an Answer to your
Question too


Well Neighbor, let us hear't then.


I beg of ye for Heaven's sake, by our Friendship begun with our Childhood and
increased with our Years: By your dear Daughter, and my only Son, (whose
welfare depends wholly upon you) to assist me in this weighty point? and let
the Match still go on, as we formerly designed


Pray, Sir, no such Entreaties: As tho I could not grant it without all this
begging. Do You think I Am not the same man as when I made the first offer? If the
Match be for both their goods, let 'em be sent for out of hand. But if more
harm than good be like to come on it, I Would have ye consi^er Matters impartially,
as tho she were your Daughter, and Pamphilus my Son


It Is upon such Conditions that I desire it, and press it so forward. Nor should
I ha been so urgent, had not the Matter required it


As how I beseech ye?


O Sir, my Son and his Mistress are fallen out.


Mere Tales!


Believe me Neighbor it is true.


Yes Faith just as I tell ye, Love's a mere Caterwawl, where scratc Sing begets
kissing


Say ye so Sir, pray then let us prevent the worst now we ve fair opportunity,
whilst the edge of his Appetite is taken off by Affronts and I^^ usage. Let Us
give him a Wife before these whe^^ling Queans by their Tricks and false Tears
soften his Lovesick Mind to pity. I hope, Sir, wh^^ he is once reclaimed by the
pleasant Conversation of a virtuous Wife, he will easily wind himself out of
these Mischiefs


You're of this Opinion, but I am not; they will never endure to be together, and
I shall be as uneasy under it


But how can you know it, till you have experienced it?


It Is ill buying Experience at the Expense of my Daughter.


Why when the worst is come to the worst, if such a thing should happen (which
Heavens forbid) they can but part. But should he once take up and mend,
consider how many Advantages will happen. First I shall have my Son well
settled, you an honest Son-in-Law, and your Daughter a good Husband


What Is all this ado for? If you're fully persuaded that all will prove for the
best, God forbid I should be your hinderance in the least


Indeed Sir, I have always had a high esteem for ye.


But to the purpose.


Well Sir.


How come ye to know that your Son and his Mistress are fallen out?


Why Sir, Davus, a Privy-Councellor of theirs told me so, and withal urged me
to strike up the Match with all speed. And do you think he would have don't,
had not he known my Son was willing too. -- Now I think on it, you shall hear't
from his own Mouth. -- Davus come hither. --

But see here he comes himself.





Well, what is the Matter?


Why don't ye send for the Bride, Sir; it grows late.


Davus, Servants are slippery, and I had a fancy once that you were as likely
to serve your Master a slippery trick as another body; especially in the Case
of my Son's Amors


Lord Sir! I do such a thing?


I was once of that Opinion, and for fear of the worst kept something to my
self which now ^ll discover to ye


And what may that be I pray Sir?


I Will tell ye, for I could now find in my heart to trust thee


I hope you're satisfied in my Fidelity at last.


In short, there was nothing of Marriage in the Case.


How, Sir, no Marriage?


No, no, 'twas but a Contrivance to feel your Pulse.


Will ye tell me so?


Even just so Davus.


Why look ye Sir, I could never comprehend this. Bless me! there is a damned
reach in it


But hear me on now. -- No sooner had I sent you in, whom should I meet but my
Neighbor here in the very nick? --


^S death is it come to this then?


-- I up and told him, What you told me. --





-- I begged his Daughter, and with much ado prevailed --


Undone, undone!





I said 'twas excellently well done.


As for Mr. Chremes he is ready.


Well I Will just step home, and put all things in order then I Will come back, and
tell ye more o^ my mind.


Now prithee Davus, seeing this is a Ma^ch wholly of thy making. --


'Twas wholly of my making with a Pox to it.


-- I d have ye take my Son in hand and help to reclaim him.


Yes Sir, I Will do my best.


That Is easily done now he is upo' the peevish pin.


Well Sir set your Heart at rest


Do It then, but where is he now?


Ten to one he is at home.


Well I Will step in, and tell him just what I told you.


Davus with a vengeance, -- there is no crying Peccavi in the the Case. I Have
turned all Topsey-turvey, imposed upon the old Man, noos'd his Son into.
Matrimony; and brought a Business about, that the one never dreamed of, and the
other was afraid of -- This it is to be super-subtle! Had I sat still, and not
been tampering, all had been well enough

But look now, as the Devil would have it, yonder he comes. -- I Am damned already.
-- What would I give for a convenient Precipice to dash my Brains out.





Heavens! what will become of me.





If I sea pe hanging this bout, I Will be sworn the Gallows will never have me.











'Sdeath he sees me.


Pray come hither good Mr. Rogue! what Excuse now? -- Don't ye see, you Rascal,
what ^ miserable Condition your damned Contrivances have brought me in to?


But I Will soon bring ye off again.


You bring me off again?


Yes Sir, without doubt.


Without doubt as ye did before.


I hope Sir a little better too.


How can I credit such a Villain? Can you set a Matter entirely lost and
desperate to rights again? -- Very fine! what a rare fellow have I relied upon?
who this day amidst a calm has raised a Storm, and forced an odious Match upon
me in spite of my Teeth? -- Didn't I tell you how 'twould be, you Rascal


You did so, Sir.


What do you deserve for your Pains?


A Halter I must confess. -- But pray, Sir, reprieve me, till I Have recovered my
Senses a little I Will soon see what is to be done in the Case


I Am sorry I have not time to give you your, due. I have scarce enough to look to
my self much less to punish you.


DId ever any body believe, or but-read of people so horribly base, as to take
pleasure in the Miseries of others, and out of them Ruins to make their own
Fortunes? -- Ah i^ this true or no? Yes, yes! it is true with a vengeance. There
are a brutal sort of Men that ma'te some scruple of a downright Refusal; but
when the time of performance comes; they pluck the Mas^ aside with trembling
hands, forced to discover what they are, and give a flat Denial; then being
past all shame they cry, Pray who are you Sir^ What are you to me Sir? Shall I
resign my Mistress to you Sir? Oh Sir, I Would have ye know, Charity always begins
at home. If ye charge them with breach of Honor, they re, not ashamed: they
can blush when there is no reason for it; but when there is, they shake hands
with their Modesty. -- what Measures shall I take? -- Shall I go to him and
reason the Case with him for this Affront? -- I Will give him ill Language
enough. -- Hold Sir (may some say) you will be never the better for it -- Oh much;
I shall certainly plague him to some purpose, and so ease my Mind a little that
way

Ah dear Sir, I ve most inconsiderately ruined you and my self too, except
Heaven help us


How! Inconsiderately do you call it? then ye ^rn't to seek for an excuse. You're
a fine Man of your word indeed.


How so, Sir?


Do You think to catch me a second time with your Flams?


What do you mean, Sir?


I no sooner told ye of my Passion for Madam Philumena, but you were strangely
smitten with her. -- What a wretch was I to judge of another's Generosity by my
own


You re still under a mistake, Sir.


Were not your Joys complete enough before without bubbling me the poor Cully,
and ^rilling me on with fantastic Hopes. -- But there! take her for me.


I take her? -- Ah Sir, you cannot concieve what troubles I lie under; and to
what a miserable pass this Rascal of mine has brought me by his damned Projects


Where Is the wonder, since he took you for his Pattern.


I Am sure ye would not talk at this rate if ye knew either me, or my
Circumstanccs





Nay Sir, to let ye see how little ye know my troubles, there was no Wedding to
be to day, nor any thing of a Wife designed for me


Yes Sir, I know 'twas a voluntary Compulsion. --


But hold Sir, ye don't know the Business yet.


Yes so much on it, that you're just upon having her.


Why do you rack me thus? Do but hear. -- He never gave over tampering with me to
tell my Father I Would marry her: Nay, he lay pressing and begging of me, till in
plain dealing I could hold out no longer


What He do you mean?


Why Davus, that He.


Who Davus?


It Is Davus all over.


How so?


Indeed I cannot tell, unless the angry Gods to punish me, made me give ear to
that Rascal





Ay too true.


What say ye Villain? Hah! -- The Gallows reward ye for it. -- Now answer me; if
all the Devils in Hell were mustered together to force a Match upon him, could
they have given fitter advice than this


I confess Sir, I have been a little outwitted, but yet I don't despair.


Very likely.


The last Nail would not go, but we'll drive one that shall; unless you fancy a
bad Beginning always makes a bad Ending





Sir, I Am bound, as your Servant, to trudge for ye Night and Day, with might
and main, even to venture my Neck, as long as I can do you any good. For what
happens cross you ought to pardon. Tho'my Measures were broke, yet I did my
best; if you can find how to do it better, I Will be gone


With all my heart. -- But first put me in the Condition you found me.


I Will do it Sir.


But out of hand then.


Hold 'S't! -- Glycerie's Door opens there.


What Is that to the purpose?


There must I make my Plot.


What Is your Plot to seek? Hah!


But now I'dad I Have hit on it.




Pumphilus of yours, I ll go hunt him up, and bring him along with me, if he be
above ground -- But my dea^ don't you lie fretting your self in the mean time?


Oh Mysis!


What Is the matter? -- Pamphilus you're well met.


Why, what is the matter?


I am to charm you from my Mistress, that if you have any Love for her, you would
come to her presently; she says she longs strangely to see ye


Alas, unhappy Man! -- My misfortunes come one upo'th neck of another -- Must
we two now be plagued upon your account? I am sent for only because she heard
of the Wedding





Very well! He Is not mad enough himself, but you must make him worse.





Mysis! I swear to thee by all that is Sacred, I Will never leave this Creature
though I should lose all the Friends I have in the whole world for it. This is she
I wished for; and my wishes are granted; our Humors are well enough suited. He
that offers to divide us I Will have nothing to do with him, Death, and nothing
but Death shall do it. --


I Am revived again.


The Oracle never spoke a truer thing. -- If the breaking off this Match could
be done by any body but me, I should be glad on it, but if that cannot be, I Will
even make a bold push on it, and own the thing. -- What think ye of me?


Just as deep in the Dirt, as I in the Mire.


My Brains are at work.


Britain.





Depend on me, I Will do your Business to your hand. Pam. It must be presently
then


I have it in my Head, Sir, I have it.


What Is that I prithee?


Your Pardon Sir, I Am working for my Master, not for you; therefore don't
mistake me


Well, I Am satisfied.


Well, what will ye do now?


Come, come, I want time for my Business, and mustn't spend it in prating; to
deal plainly with ye, you do but hinder me, and I had rather have your Room than
your Company


Well I Will to my Mistress.





Shall I tell ye the very truth? --





Prithee what shall poor I do?


Very pleasant IN faith! Arn't ye content that I Have put off the wedding, and
reprieved ye for one short day


But yet Davus --


but yet?


That I may but marry her.


A pleasant Freak!


Order the Matter so that you may come to my House there if possible.


What should I come for I Have no Business.


But if something should happen --





If there be any occasion, I shall be at home.


Mysis, I must go out a little, do but you stay till I come back.


For a certain Reason that I know.


Prithee be quick then.


I Will be here in a trice.


Pamphilus to be the very Heart and Soul of my Mistress, a Friend, a Lover, and
in effect a Husband, and all in one, and ready to serve her upon all occasions:
And yet after all, what Miseries does this unfortunate Woman endure for his
sake? And how much greater is her present Trouble, than all her former
Satisfaction

O here comes Davus again. -- Prithee good Boy what have we here? --


Now Mysis for one cast of thy Skill and Cunning at a Pinch.


What Plot's next Davus?


Here, take the Child quickly, and lay it at our Door.


Prithee what on the cold Ground?


Cannot ye take some of those Herbs there, and lay under it?


Well and why cannot ye do it your self?


Why if my Master put me to swear whether I laid it there or no, I may do it
with a safe Conscience


I understand ye. But pray how came this sudden qualm upon you? -- Give it me
then She takes the Child and moves toward Simo' s Door


Prithee go faster and be back again in a moment, that I may give ye your
Lesson. --

Chremes appears at a great distance.

But Oh the Devil!





Yonder Is the Bride's Father; and I must even go another way to work now.


I cannot imagine what you would have.


I Will make as if I came from that way there of the Right Hand. -- Be sure to put
in a word or two upon occasion to make our Stories hang together


Of My Conscience I know your designs no more than a Post. -- If I can do you
any Service (which you know better than I) I Will stay where I am, without
putting any stop to your Business










What are ye Tongue-ty'd?


Alas! he is not to be seen. -- O dear heart, the Fellow has left me and is
vanished

Davus appears seemingly out of Breath, pretending he sees not Chremes, and
bawls as loud as he can


Bless me! what a Bustle's yonder in the Market! -- There Is a squabble indeed --
then Corn is confoundedly dear. -- Troth I have nothing else to say











Who should I ask? there is no body else here to ask?


I wonder whence it should come?


Come will ye give me an Answer or no?


Oh Lord!





The Man is mop'd, wan't it your self? --





Dye threaten me?





From our House.





I Am mistaken if this ben't the Andrian's Maid.


Can ye find no body else to make sport with?


I came in the very critical Minute.


You Would best make haste, and be packing with the Child from the Door. --


Shame take ye for me, ye do so fright me.





Why what would the man have?


Have with a Pox? Come tell me whose Child you have laid there, once for all,
tell me


You don't know I warrant ye.


A fig for what I know; do you tell me what I ask.


It Is yours among ye!





Why it is Mr Pamphilus's.


Zookers! what my Master Pamphilus's.


Very fine! why is not it?


I was always in the right to be against this Match.





Why do you bawl so?


Why didn't I see this very Child brought to your House last Night?


Oh thou brazen Face!


I Am sure I saw Gammer Cauthara as big as she could tumble with something she
carried


Well 'twas a Blessing, that many creditable women were at my Mistress's Labor.


I Am sure she did not know her Man for whom she designed this Trick. I warrant,
said they, when Chremes sees the Child, he will not part with his Daughter. But
in faith he will do it the sooner for that


In Faith but he will not tho.


Now therefore in plain English, if ye don't take away the Bastard, I Will kick
it into the middle of the Street, and take ye and set your A -- in the Kennel


You're either drunk or mad sure.


How one piece of Roguery brings out another: Now they begin to buz it about,
that this Glycerie is a Citizen of Athens, --


How?


-- So that the Law will make him marry her in spite of his teeth.


Under favor, sweet Sir, Is she not a Citizen?


I had like to have fooled fair, why I had almost noos'd my self.


Whose Tongue's that?


I Have heard all. Dav. How all?


Why all from the beginning.


You Have heard it then? -- Fine Rogueries on foot! Now shou'dn't this same Jade
be Carted? -- Davus is the Man you play upon. Here Is the Gentleman himself.


Ah dear! Indeed Sir, an't please your Worship, I have not spoke one word of a Lie.


I know the whole Business. -- But is my Neighbor Simo within?


I think so Sir.

Davus goes to play with Mysis.


Hands off Varlet! If I don't do your Errand to my Mistress, never trust me.


Oh thou silly Soul thou dosn't know how the Case stands.


How should I?


Why this is the Bride's Father, and without all this, he could not have known
what we'd have him


Could Not ye give me an Item before?


Pshaw! as if there were no difference between what Nature does briskly on a
sudden, and what is done by dull direction




Chrysis lived somewhere down this Lane. And she found there was more to be got
by Jaderyin the Town than Honesty in the Country. But now as she is dead I Am
Heir at Law to her Goods. Where shall I ask about her? -- O there are Folks. --


Goodnow, who is that? Is Not it old Crito, Mrs. Chrysis's Kinsman? -- The very
same


O Mysis! I Am glad to see thee.


And I you, good Crito.


And is it so with poor Chrysis, Hah? --


Yes indeed; she has left us to our sorrows.


Pray how do you do? -- How go's the World? Pretty hoddy, Hah?


What we? -- They that cannot do as they would, must even do as they may, as the
saying is


How does young Glycerie? Has she found her Relations here?


Ah, would she had.


What not yet? -- Then I Have brought my Hogs to a fair Market. 'Sbud if I had
known so much beforehand, the De'el a foot would I have stirred out of my
House. For she passed with every body for Chrysis's Sister, and she is now in
possession of what she had. Now for me, that know no body, to hamper my self in
Lawsuits, there are Examples enough in the world to keep me from burning my
fingers. And, now I think on it, she may get some spruce Gallant to stand by
her, for she was in the Teens, let me tell ye, when she went from us, the
people will cry out, This is a beggarly Rascal, that sets up only a forged
Title. And then a body would make some Conscience too of turning the poor Girl
a begging


Go thy ways honest Crito in troth; you are the same Crito still.


Come bring me to her however; since I Am come so far, I Will see the poor Rogue.


With all my heart.





Simo, you have had proof enough in all Conscience of my Friendship to ye; and
I Have run risque enough for you: Therefore pray let us have no more of these
Importunities. I have complied with ye now so long, that I was within a very
little of undoing my Daughter


Nay Sir, I must more and more entreat you and adjure ye, that you would make good
all your Promises with your Effects


But pray see Sir, how unreasonable your Passion makes ye? For as long as you
can obtain your own Ends, you don't regard common Civility, nor well consider
what you would have your self. If ye did, I Am sure you would not desire to serve me
after this rate


After what rate pray?


Ah Sir, do you ask that Question? You Have put me upon marrying my Daughter to a
wild Spark of the Town, that is pre-ingag'd and a Marriagehater, to have 'em
always wrangling, and forced to part in a fortnight's time; thus my Daughter's
to be mortified; and your Son t have the Benefit of it. I promised ye and began
to perform with ye, whilst the matter would bear it; and since 'twill bear no
longer, ye must have Patience. His Mistress they say is a free Citizen, and
there is a Child got between 'em; therefore pray don't give us any further
disturbance


For Goodness sake, Sir, don't trouble your Head with such idle Stories. I tell
ye it is their chief Interest to make him as bad they can; this is all a Trick
from one end to the other to break off the Match; now do but take away the
Cause of this, and the Effect ceases of it self


You're out indeed Sir; for I just now saw her Maid and Davus quarrelling about
it


I know the trick.


Nay they were in earnest, for they little thought of my seeing 'em


That I believe too, for I had an Item of this Stratagem from Davus; and I
thought to have given ye a hint on it, but something put it out of my Head







Look ye, yonder is your Man Davus.


Whence comes the Rogue?

















Why don't I speak to him?








O my good Masters! Simo and Chremes both. Why all things are ready within.


You Have taken a world of pains I don t doubt.


Now, Sir, send for the Bride as soon as ye please.


Very well! -- there is nothing but that wanting. -- But good Sir, let me ask ye
one Question. -- What business had you at that House Sirrah?


Who I, Sir? Sim. Ay you Sir.


Meaning me Sir?


Yes, you Sir, if ye must be told so often.


Why Sir, 'twasn't three minutes since I went in --


Sirrah, do I ask ye how long since?


-- With my Master Pamphilus.





So they are Sir.


What should he do there then?


What do you think Sir? -- Only the other brush of quarrelling.


Ah Mr Chremes, there is more in the Wind; I Will tell ye perhaps one of the
foulest Stories you ever met withal. --


What News from him pray?


Nay, none to speak of -- Only I remember he was a saying --


Well but what was he a saying?


-- That he certainly knows Glycerie to be a Citizen of Athens.


Soho! Dromo! Dromo!


What a Devil's to do now?


I say!


But hear me, Sir, --


Dog! Speak but another word -- Why Dromo, Dromo!








Take this Rascal in, and truss him up imimediately.


Who do you mean Sir?


Davus here.


Why good Sir, why?


It Is my pleasure --


Why what have I done Sir?


Away with him.


If you catch me in a Lie, cut my Throat.





Notwithstanding it be true.


Notwithstanding -- do you

As I Am a living Soul, Sirrah, I Will make ye to know this day what it is for a
Servant to put tricks upon his Master, and for a Son to make sport with his
Father.


For Heaven's sake Sir moderate your Passion.


Ah Sir, when it comes to the Duty of a Son, that is a tender point: Don't ye
pity me? -- that I should take so much pains for such an ungracious wretch? --
Pamphilus! -- out of your fulsom Nest. -- Ha ye no Grace left


Who calls there? --


What say thou, the most ungracious --


O fie Sir, leave this ill Language, and argue the case calmly.


As though the worst Language was not good enough for him. -- Glycerie is a
Citizen


It Is so reported, Sir.


Reported, Jackanapes? -- O prodigious Impudence! was ever such an unthinking
Coxcomb? Does he repent of any thing he has done? Nay has he Grace so much as
to blush at it? -- Is he so little Master of himself as to set his Heart upon
such an infamous woman without regard either to the Customs or Laws of his
Country, or to the will and Pleasure of his Father


Oh me!


O Pamphilus, are ye at last convinced? -- then, then indeed you should have
thought of this, when first ye took your swing in all that is base, then you
should have cried, Oh me! --


Dear Father! -- In a soft Tone.


dear Father? As though you stood in need of such a Father. -- You Have got your
House, your Wife and Children, and the dear Father never the wiser; you have
brought your Cheat to prove her a Citizen. -- You Have got the day much good
may't do ye


Pray hear me one word Sir.


What can you say for your self?


Good Sir, give him the hearing.


I hear him? What should I hear him for Mr. Chremes?


But you may let him speak tho.


Let him speak then, who hinders him?


you shall think fit or command. Would ye have me marry one woman, and part with
another: I must bear either, as well as I can. Only thus much let me beg of ye,
that you wou'dn t believe that I suborned this old Man: Let me but clear my
self of that and bring him face to face


Bring him?


Pray Sir let me.


It Is nothing but reason, pray let him.


Sir, I beseech ye don t deny me.


Well: let it be so then. --

You see Sir, I Am content with any thing as long as I ben't grossly imposed upon.


A small Punishment serves for a great Fault, between Father and Son.


Glycerie's sake, that I Have a great kindness for.


Is that old Crito of Andro? -- the very same. -- Troth Crito I Am glad to see
thee. What wind blew thee to Athens


A chance one. -- Is this Mr. Simo?


Yes.


Do You ask for me? -- Hark ye Friend,

Have you the face to say, that Glycerie is a Citizen of Athens?


And have ye the Face to deny it?


You Have your Lesson without Book I perceive.


Why that pray?


Would ye know? -- Don't ye deserve to l e laid by the Heels for this? Are you
come here to trapan and inveigle raw young Gentlemen? And to feed their Fancies
with fine Flams, and ga^ Promises? --





Then you make Matches between the^ and their Whores together.


Alas! how do I tremble for fear the o'd man shoudn't stand his ground.





The Devil's Broker! He honest? -- to come just in the nick on the Wedding da^,
to set up for an Evidence, and was never here before in his whole Life? well
must his testimony carry't


If I wern't afraid of my Father, I ve that at my Tongue's end would help him
out at a d^^^ lift.


A Knight of the post!


What does be call me?


It Is his way, you would better let him alone.


Let him look to it. If he pretends to talk what e're he has a mind to, I Will
make him hear something that he has no mind to. Athenian Merchant cast away at
Andro, and that little Girl with him; this man, being in want, had the hap to
apply himself to Chrysiss Father. --





Pray let him go on.


Why does he put me out?


On with your Story.


Well! Now this same Crysis's Father, (D^^e mind?) was my Kinsman. And there
did I hear the Man himself say, that he was a Merchant of Athens; in short,
there he died


His Name?


His Name? -- Let me see, Oh his Name was Phania.


Bless me! I Am in a cold sweat.


Why truly Sir, I think they call him Phania. However, this I Am sure of, he
said he was a ^amnusian; --


Oh Heavens!


-- And a world of people in Andro heard as much as I.


Crito tell me. What said he about this Girl? Did he say she was his own?


No Sir.


Whose then pray?


His Brother's I think.


OF my Soul she is mine then.


What do you say, Sir?


How Is this? what say ye?


Courage Pamphilus, Courage!


What make ye believe it so readily?


Why this Phania was my Brother.


I know it: I was well acquainted with him.


In The time o the late Wars he fled for it, and ^^llow'd me into Asia, but was
afraid to leave my ^^ughter behind him. Now Sir, this is the first ^^ws I ve
heard of him ever since


Methinks I Am in another world. My M^nd's distracted twixt Fear and Hope, Joy
and ^onder at such a sudden B^essing.


I m glad upon several accounts sh's found (...) your Daughter.


I believe, Sir, it is true.


But hark ye Crito there is one scruple yet that makes me uneasy.


Would you and your Scruples were hanged together. This is hunting for a Knot
in a Bulr^^^


What Is that Sir?


The Name will not do.


Truly she had another Name when she was a little one.


Prithee what is it? Don't ye remember?


I Am hammering at it.


Chremes! Passibula is the Name you want.


Ay, that is it, that is it. The very same.


I had it from her own Mouth a thousand times.


Truly this is good News for all on's, and I hope you think so too.


As I hope to be saved it is true.





Why now we are all friends again.


The best of Fathers! -- I suppose Me Chremes will allow us to be in statu quo.


And all the Reason in the world, unless your Father's against all.


I Am sure he is not. I agree to it.


Mr Pamphilus, you shall have two thousand Pounds with her.


I Am satisfied Sir.


Well I Will to my poor Girl in an instant -- Come, Crito, go you along with me,
for I make a doubt whether she knows me or no


And had not ye better send for her now?


I think 'twere better, and that shall be Davis's business.


But that cannot be.


Why so Sir?


Because he is a little engaged


As how Sir?


Why he is bound Neck and Heels.


Ah Sir, 'twasn't well done.


I Am sure I ordered it to be well done.


Pray, Sir, let him be undone then.


Well, let it be so then.


But immediately Sir, if you please.


I Will in and about it.


A blessed and happy days work! Ex. Simo.


Pamphilus. -- Oh yonder he is.


Some may be apt to think my Heart is far From what my Lips do utter, but even
Now, Now it is I Am Conscious what I says most true. That Gods themselves would
not immortal be, Were not their Joys like them immortal too. -- And now
methinks I Am all encircled round With Heavenly Bliss, if no Left handed God
Come in between and dash my sweets with sour. Oh for a Friend to whom I might
relate This blessed Change to make it the more complete


What Is the meaning of these Reptures?


Oh yonder is Davus, the Man of the whole Earth I could have wished for; for I Am
sure there is not a Soul can more heartily relish my Enjoyments


Pamphilus now?


Oh Davus!





It Is I old Rock!





Ay ye don't know what good Fortune I ve met withal.


No Faith! But I know to my sorrow what Fortune I Have met withal.


Ay Boy that I know too.


Just as the world goes. Bad News always flys faster than good.


My dearest has found out her Parents.


Before George it is brave.





And her Father is one of our great Cronies.


Who Is that pray?


No less than Mr Chremes.


Spoken like a Cherubim!


I Have now nothing to do but to marry her, and --


The Man dreams of what he has a mind to waking.


Then for the Child Davus --


No more of him. I Will warrant ye he will come to be a Hero at last.





Who goes there? -- O dear Charine, you're come in the luckiest time that could
be


I m very well, pleased --


How! Have ye heard the News then?


Every Syllable. -- Well I hope will not forget your old Friend on your Wedding
day. Mr. Chremes is now your own, if you will but say the word, I Am sure he will
do it


I ll warrant ye, not forget ye. -- 'T would be too long to wait Mr. Chremes's
coming, let us even go to my Mistress where we shall be sure to find him. -- But
do you Davus go home, and send Company to remove her to our's. -- What makes ye
stand like a Post? -- why don't ye move


I Am going Sir. --

Gallants, You must not expect their return, for the Match and every thing else
will be made up within Doors. -- One Clap, good Gentlemen



